part  in  a  treaty.
On  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  Ridges  and  Boudinot  several  other
signers  of  the  repudiated  treaty,  among  whom  were  John  Bell,
Archilla  Smith,  and  James  Starr,  tied  for  safety  to  the  protection  of
the  garrison  at  Fort  Gibson.  Boudinot's  brother,  Stand  Wade, vowed  vengeance  against  Ross,  who  was  urged  to  flee,  but  refused.
declaring  his  entire  innocence.  His  friends  rallied  to  his  support,
stationing  a  guard  around  his  house  until  the  first  excitement  had  sub-
sided. About  three  weeks  afterward  the  national  council  passed
decrees  declaring  that  the  men  killed  and  their  principal  confederates
i  Agent  Stokes  to  Secretary  of  War,  June  24,  1839,  in  Report  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  365,  1839;
Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  293, 1888;  Drake,  Indians,  pp.  159-460,
1880;  author's  personal  information.  The  agent's  report  incorrectly  makes  the  killings  occur  on three  different  days.


mooney]  REUNION    OF    NATION— 1839  135
had  rendered  themselves  outlaws  by  their  own  conduct,  extending
amnesty  on  certain  stringent  conditions  to  their  confederates,  and
declaring  the  slayers  guiltless  of  murder  and  fully  restored  to  the  con-
fidence and  favor  of  the  community.  This  was  followed  in  August  by
another  council  decree  declaring  the  New  Echota  treaty  void  and  reas-
serting the  title  of  the  Cherokee  to  their  old  country,  and  three  weeks
later  another  decree  summoned  the  signers  of  the  treaty  to  appear  and
answer  for  their  conduct  under  penalty  of  outlawry.  At  this  point
the  United  States  interfered  by  threatening  to  arrest  Ross  as  acces-
sory to  the  killing  of  the  Ridges.1  In  the  meant i me  the  national  part}
and  the  Old  Settlers  hail  been  eon  line  together,  and  a  few  of  the  latter
who  had  sided  with  the  Ridge  faction  and  endeavored  to  perpetuate  a
division  in  the  Nation  were  denounced  in  a  council  of  the  Old  Settler-.,
which  declared  that  "in  identifying  themselves  with  those  individuals
known  as  the  Ridge  party,  who  by  their  conduct  had  rendered  them-
selves odious  to  the  (  'herokee  [   pie.  they  have  acted  in  opposition  to
the  known  sentiments  and  feelings  of  that  portion  of  this  Nation  known
as  Old  Settlers,  frequently  and  variously  and  publicly  expressed."
The  offending  chief-  were  at  the  same  time  deposed  from  all  authority.
Among  tlie  names  of  over  two  hundred  signers  attached  thai  of
••  ( i-eorge  Guess"  (Sequoya)  come-  second  as  vice-president.8
On  July  1-.  L839,  a  general  convention  of  the  eastern  and  western
Cherokee,  held  at  the  Illinois  camp  ground,  Indian  territory,  passed
an  act  of  union,  by  which  the  two  were  declared  '"one  body  politic.
under  the  style  and  title  of  the  Cherokee  Nation."  On  behalf  id'  the
eastern  Cherokee  the  instrument  bears  the  signature  of  John  Ross,
principal  chief.  George  Lowrey,  president  of  the  council,  and  Going
snake  (I'nadu-na'I),  speaker  of  the  council,  with  thirteen  others.  For
the  western  ('herokee  it  was  signed  by  John  Looney,  acting  principal
chief ,  George  Guess  (Sequoya),  president  of  the  council,  and  fifteen
others.  On  September  r>.  L839,  a  convention  composed  chiefry  of
eastern  ('herokee  assembled  at  Tahlequah,  Indian  territory  -then  first
officially  adopted  as  the  national  capital  —adopted  a  new  constitution,
which  was  accepted  by  a  convention  of  the  Old  Settlers  at  Fort  Gib-
son, Indian  Territory,  on  June  26,  1840,  an  act  which  completed  the
reunion  of  the  Nation. :
Till:    ARKANSAS    BAND— 1817-   L838
Having  followed  the  fortunes  of  the  main  body  of  the  Nation  to
their  final  destination   in  the  West,   we  now    turn   to   review    briefly
i:   rokee  Nation,  op.  eit,    pp.  294
  h   ii-    Lugusl  23,  L839,  in  Report  In. linn  Commissioner,  p.  387,  1839;  Royce,  op.  'it..
p   j'.' i Ictof  Union  "  and  •' Constitution  "  in  Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  1875;
[etti  i  to  the  Secretai    ol  Wai    June  28,  L840,  In   Eti  |     India
p,  16,  1-1"


186  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  history  of  the  earlier  emigrants,  the  Arkansas  or  Old  Settler
Cherokee.
The  events  leading  to  the  first  westward  migration  and  the  subse-
quent negotiations  which  resulted  in  the  assignment  of  a  territory  in
Arkansas  to  the  western  Cherokee,  by  the  treaty  of  L817,  have  been
already  noted.  The  great  majority  of  those  thus  voluntarily  remov-
ing belonged  to  the  conservative  hunter  element,  who  desired  to  rees-
tablish in  the  western  wilderness  the  old  Indian  life  from  which,
through  the  influence  of  schools  and  intelligent  leadership,  the  body
of  the  Cherokee  was  rapidly  drifting  away.  As  the  lands  upon  which
the  emigrants  had  settled  belonged  to  the  Osage,  whose  claim  had  not
yet  been  extinguished  by  the  United  States,  the  latter  objected  to
their  presence,  and  the  Cherokee  were  compelled  to  fight  to  maintain
their  own  position,  so  that  for  the  first  twenty  years  or  more  the  his-
tory of  the  western  band  is  a  mere  petty  chronicle  of  Osage  raids  and
Cherokee  retaliations,  emphasized  from  time  to  time  by  a  massacre  on
a  larger  scale.  By  the  treaty  of  1*17  the  western  Cherokee  acquired
title  to  a  definite  territory  and  official  standing  under  Government  pro-
tection and  supervision,  the  lands  assigned  them  Inning  been  acquired
by  treaty  from  the  Osage.  The  great  body  of  the  Cherokee  in  the
East  were  strongly  opposed  to  any  recognition  of  the  western  hand,
seeing  in  such  action  only  the  beginning  of  an  effort  looking  toward
the  ultimate  removal  of  the  whole  tribe.  The  Government  lent  sup-
port to  the  scheme,  however,  and  a  steady  emigration  set  in  until,  in
lM'.t.  the  emigrant^  were  said  to  number  several  thousands.  Unsuc-
cessful endeavors  were  made  to  increase  the  number  by  inducing  the
Shawano  and  Delaware*  of  Missouri  and  the  Oneida  of  New  York  to
join  them.'
In  L818  Tollunteeskee  (Ata'lunti'ski),  principal  chief  of  the  Arkan- sas Cherokee,  while  on  a  visit  to  old  friends  in  the  East,  had  become
acquainted  with  one  of  the  officers  of  the  American  Board  of  Commis-
sioners for  Foreign  Missions,  and  had  asked  for  the  establishment  of
a  mission  among  his  people  in  the  West.  In  response  to  the  invitation
the  Reverend  Cephas  Washburn  and  his  assistant.  Reverend  Alfred
Finney,  with  their  families,  set  out  the  next  year  from  the  old  Nation.
and  after  a  long  and  exhausting  journey  reached  the  Arkansas  country,
where,  in  the  spring  of  1820,  they  established  Dwight  mission,  adjoin-
ing the  agency  at  the  mouth  of  Illinois  creek,  on  the  northern  bank
of  the  Arkansas,  in  what  is  now  Pope  county,  Arkansas.  The  name
was  bestowed  in  remembrance  of  Timothy  Dwight.  a  Yale  president
and  pioneer  organizer  of  the  American  Hoard.  Tollunteeskee  having
died  in  the  meantime  was  succeeded  as  principal  chief  by  his  brother.
John  Jolly,8  the  friend  and  adopted  father  of  Samuel  Houston.     Jolly
1  See  ante,  pp.  105-106;  Nuttall.  who  was  oil  the  ground,  gives  them  only  L.500.
2Washburn,  Cephas,  Reminiscences  "i*  the  Indians,  pp.  81,103;  Richmond,  1869.


moosey]  TROUBLES    WITH    OSAGE-    1SI7-^'  137
had  removed  from  bis  old  borne  at  the  mouth  of  Hiwassee,  in  Ten-
nessee, in  1 81  v.
In  the  spring  of   L819  Tl   as  Nuttall,  the  naturalist,  ascended   the
Arkansas,  ami  he  gives  an  interesting  accounl  of  the  western  Cherokee
as  he  found  theinal  the  time,  [n  going  up  the  stream,  "both  banks  of
the  river,  as  we  proceeded,  were  lined  with  the  houses  and  farms  of
the  Cherokee,  and  though  their  die--  was  a  mixture  of  indigenous
and  European  taste,  yel  in  their  houses,  which  are  decently  furnished,
and  in  their  farms,  which  were  well  fenced  and  stocked  with  cattle,  we
perceive  a  happy  approach  toward  civilization.  Their  numerous  fami-
lies, also,  well  fed  and  clothed,  argue  a  propitious  progress  in  their
population.  Their  superior  industry  either  as  hunters  or  farmers
proves  the  value  of  property  among  them,  and  they  are  no  longer
strangers  to  avarice  and  the  distinctions  created  by  wraith.  Some  of
them  are  possessed  of  property  to  the  amount  of  many  thousands  of
dollars,  ha\  e  houses  handsomely  and  conveniently  furnished,  and  their
tables  spread  with  our  dainties  and  luxuries."  He  mentions  an  engage-
ment some  time  before  between  them  and  the  Osage,  in  which  the
Cherokee  had  killed  nearly  one  hundred  of  the  Osage,  besides  taking
a  number  of  prisoners.  He  estimates  them  at  about  fifteen  hundred,
being  about  half  the  number  estimated  by  the  eastern  Nation  as  hav-
ing emigrated  to  the  West,  and  only  one-fourth  of  the  official  estimate.
A  few   Delawares  wen'  living  with  them.2
The  Osage  troubles  continued  in  spite  of  a  treaty  of  peace  between
the  two  tribes  made  at  a  council  held  under  the  direction  of  <  rovernor
Clark  at  St.  Louis,  in  October,  L818.3  Warriors  from  the  eastern
Cherokee  were  accustomed  to  make  the  long  journey  to  the  Arkansas
to  assist  their  western  brethren,  and  returned  with  scalps  and  captives.'
In  the  summer  of  L820  a  second  effort  for  peace  was  made  by  Gov-
ernor Miller  of  Arkansas  territory.  In  reply  to  his  talk  the  I  (sage
complained  that  the  Cherokee  had  failed  to  deliver  their  Osage  cap
fives  as  stipulated  in  the  previous  agreement  at  St.  Louis.  This,  it
appears,  was  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that  some  of  these  captives  had
been  carried  to  the  eastern  Cherokee,  and  a  messenger  was  accordingly
dispatched  to  secure  and  bring  them  hack.  Another  peace  conference
was  held  soon  afterward  at  Fort  Smith,  hut  to  very  little  purpose,  as
hostilities  were  soon  resumed  and  continued  until  the  United  States
actively  interposed  in  the  fall  of  L822.5
In  this  year  also  Sequoya  visited  the  western  ( Jherokee  to  introduce
'Nuttall,  Journal  ol  Travels  into  the  Arkansas  Territory,  etc.,  p.  129;  Philadelphia,  1821.
-Ibid.,  pp.  123-136.    The  battle  mentioned  seems  t.>  in-  the  same  noted  somewhat  differently  by
:     Reminiscent  es,  p.  120
•Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  <  it    i>.  222
•  Washburn,  >>]■-  fit..  i>.  160,  and  personal  information  trom  .1.  D,  Wafford.
op.  cit.   pp.  242,  243;  Washhum,  op.  cit.,  pp.  112-122  et  passim;  see  also  sk<
and  Tooantuh  or  Spring-frog,  in  McKenney  and  Hall,  Indian  Tribes,  i  and  ii,  185S.


138  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ass.19
to  them  the  knowledge  of  his  great  invention,  which  was  at  once  taken
up  through  the  influence  of  Takatoka  (IVgata'ga).  a  prominent  chief
who  had  hitherto  opposed  every  effort  of  the  missionaries  to  intro-
duce their  own  schools  and  religion.  In  consequence  perhaps  of  this
encouragement  Sequoya  removed  permanently  to  the  West  in  the  fol-
lowing year  and  became  henceforth  a  member  of  the  western  Nation.1
Like  other  Indians,  the  western  ( iherokee  held  a  firm  belief  in  witch-
craft, which  led  to  frequent  tragedies  of  punishment  or  retaliation.
In  L824  a  step  forward  was  marked  by  the  enactment  of  a  law  making
it  murder  to  kill  any  one  for  witchcraft,  and  an  offense  punishable
with  whipping  to  accuse  another  of  witchcraft.8  This  law  may  have
been  the  result  of  the  silent  working  of  missionary  influence,  sup-
ported by  such  enlightened  men  as  Sequoya.
The  treaty  which  assigned  the  Arkansas  lands  to  the  western  Cher-
okee had  stipulated  that  a  census  should  be  made  of  the  eastern  and
western  divisions  of  the  Nation,  separately,  and  an  apportionment  of  the
national  annuity  forthwith  made  on  that  basis.  The  western  line  of
the  Arkansas  tract  had  also  been  left  open,  until  according  to  another
stipulation  of  the  same  treaty,  the  whole  amount  of  land  ceded  through  it
to  the  United  States  by  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  the  East  could  be  ascer-
tained in  order  that  an  equal  quantity  might  be  included  within  the
boundaries  of  the  western  tract.3  These  promises  had  not  yet  been
fulfilled,  partly  because  of  the  efforts  of  the  Government  to  bring
about  a  larger  emigration  or  a  further  cession,  partly  on  account  of
delay  in  the  state  surveys,  and  partly  also  because  the  Osage  objected
to  the  running  of  a  line  which  should  make  the  Cherokee  their  next
door  neighbors.4  With  their  boundaries  unadjusted  and  their  annui-
ties withheld,  distress  and  dissatisfaction  overcame  the  western  Cher-
okee, many  of  whom,  feeling  themselves  absolved  from  territorial
restrictions,  spread  over  the  country  on  the  southern  side  of  Arkansas
river,"'  while  others,  under  the  lead  of  a  chief  named  The  Bowl
(Diwa'di).  crossed  Red  river  into  Texas — then  a  portion  of  Mexico — in
a  vain  attempt  to  escape  American  jurisdiction."
A  provisional  western  boundary  having  been  run,  which  proved
unsatisfactory  both  to  the  western  Cherokee  and  to  the  people  of
Arkansas,  an  effort  was  made  to  settle  the  difficulty  by  arranging  an
exchange  of  the  Arkansas  tract  for  a  new  country  west  of  the  Arkansas
line.  So  strongly  opposed,  however,  were  the  western  Cherokee  to
this  project  that  their  council,  in  L825,  passed  a  law.  as  the  eastern
Cherokee  and  the  Creeks  had  already  done,  fixing  the  death  penalty
1  Washburn.  Reminiscences,  p.  17s.  lsii'.l;  see  also  ante  p.  206.
°-  Ibid,  p.  138.
»See  Treaty  of  1S17.  Indian  Treaties,  1837.
» Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Report  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  243, 244, 1888.
5  Ibid,  p.  243.
6  Author's  personal  information;  see  p.  143.


TREAT*    OF    WASHINGTON-     L82S  139
for  anyone  of  the  tribe  who  should  undertake  to  cede  or  exchange  iand
belonging  to  the  Nation.'
After  a  long  series  of  negotiations  such  pi'essure  was  brought  to
bear  upon  a  delegation  which  visited  Washington  in  1828  thai  consent
was  al  last  obtained  to  an  exchange  of  the  Arkansas  tract  for  another
piece  of  seven  million  acres  lying  farther  west,  together  with  "a  per-
petual outlet  west"  of  the  trad  thus  assigned,  as  fat-  west  a-  the
sovereignty  of  the  United  States  migh<  extend.4  The  boundaries
given  for  this  seven-million-acre  tract  and  the  adjoining  western
outlet  were  modified  by  treat \  at  Fort  Gibson  five  years  later  so  as  to
he  practically  equivalent  to  the  present  territory  of  the  Cherokee
Nation  in  Indian  Territory,  with  the  Cherokee  strip  recently  ceded.
The  preamble  of  the  Washington  treaty  of  May  6,  L828,  recites  that
"  Whereas,  it  being  the  anxious  desire  of  thet  rovernment  of  the  United
States  to  secure  to  the  Cherokee  nati   f  Indians.  ;ls  well  those  now
living  within  the  limits  of  the  territory  of  Arkansas  as  those  of  their
friends  and  brothers  who  reside  in  state-  east  of  the  Mississippi,
and  who  may  wish  to  join  their  brothers  of  the  West,  a  permanent
//"///-.and  which  shall,  under  the  mosl  solemn  guarantee  of  the  United
States,  he  and  remain  theirs  forever  a  home  that  shall  never,  in  all
future  time,  he  eml larrassed  by  having  extended  around  it  the  lines
or  placed  over  it  the  jurisdiction  of  a  territory  or  state,  nor  he  pressed
upon  by  the  extension  in  any  way  of  any  of  the  limits  of  any  existing
territory  or  state;  and  whereas  the  present  location  of  the  Cherokees
in  Arkansas  being  unfavorable  to  their  present  repose,  and  tending,
a-  the  past  demonstrates,  to  their  future  degradation  and  misery,  and
the  ( 'herokees  being  anxious  to  avoid  such  consequences,"  etc.  there-
fore, they  vfd>'  everything  confirmed  to  them  in  1817.
Article  2  defines  the  boundaries  of  the  new  tract  and  the  western
outlet  to  lie  given  in  exchange,  lying  immediately  west  of  the  present
Arkansas  line,  while  the  next  article  provides  for  the  removal  of  all
whites  and  others  residing  within  the  said  boundaries,  "so  that  no
obstacles  arising  out  of  the  presence  of  a  white  population,  or  anj
population  of  any  other  sort,  -hall  exist  to  annoy  the  Cherokees,  and
also  to  keep  all  such  from  the  west  of  said  line  in  future.*' Other  articles  provide  for  payment  for  improvements  left  behind;
for  a  cash  sum  of  §50,000  to  pay  for  trouble  and  expense  of  removal
and  to  compensate  for  the  inferior  quality  of  the  lands  in  the  new
tract:  for  $6,000  to  pay  for  recovering  stock  which  may  stray  away
•■  in  quest  of  the  pastures  from  which  they  may  he  driven  ;"  $8,760  for
spoliations  committed  by  Osage  and  whites;  $500  to  George  Guess
(Sequoya)-  who  was  himself  one  of  the  signers— in  consideration  of
the  beneficial  results  to  his  tribe  from  the  alphabet  invented  by  him:
120,000  in  ten  annual  payments  for  education;  $1,000  for  a  printing
1  Royce,  Cherokee  Saturn,  op  cit.,  p.  215.  -  [bid.    pp    H7  248.


140  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
press  and  type  to  aid  in  the  enlightenment  of  the  people  "in  their  own
and  our  language";  a  personal  indemnity  for  false  imprisonment:  and
for  the  removal  and  reestablishment  of  the  Dwight  mission.
In  article  6  "it  is  moreover  agreed  by  the  United  States,  whenever
the  Cherokee  may  desire  it.  to  give  them  a  set  of  plain  laws,  suited  to
their  condition:  also,  when  they  wish  t<>  lay  off  their  lands  and  own
them  individually,  a  surveyor  shall  be  sent  to  make  the  surveys  at  the
cost  of  the  United  States."  This  article  was  annulled  in  1833  by
request  of  the  Cherokee.
Article  9  provides. for  the  Fort  Gibson  military  reservation  within
the  new  tract,  while  article  7  hinds  the  Cherokee  to  surrender  and
remove  from  all  their  lands  in  Arkansas  within  fourteeiijnonths.
Article  8  shows  that  all  this  was  intended  to  he  only  preliminary  to
the  removal  of  the  whole  Cherokee  Nation  from  the  east  of  the  Missis-
sippi, a  consummation  toward  which  the  Jackson  administration  and
the  state  of  Georgia  immediately  began  t<>  bend  every  effort.  It  is  as
follows:
Article  S.  The  Cherokee  nation,  west  of  tin-  Mississippi,  having  bythis  agreement
freed  themselves  from  the  harassing  and  ruinous  effects  consequent  upon  a  location
amidst  a  white  population,  ami  secured  to  themselves  and  their  posterity,  under  the
solemn  sanction  of  the  guarantee  of  the  United  States  as  contained  in  this  agreement,
a  large  extent  of  unembarrassed  country;  and  that  their  brothers  yet  remaining  in
the  states  may  he  induced  to  join  them  and  enjoy  the  repose  and  blessings  of  such  a
state  in  the  future,  it  i.-  further  agreed  mi  the  part  of  the  United  States  that  to  each
h,  ul  of  a  (  herokee  fannh  now  reoi  ling  within  the  chartered  limits  cf  1  eorgi  i,  or
of  either  of  the  states  oast  of  the  Mississippi,  who  may  desire  to  remove  west,  shall
he  given,  mi  enrolling  himself  for  emigration,  a  g   1  rifle,  a  blanket,  a  kettle,  and
five  pounds  of  tobacco;  (and  to  each  member  of  his  family  one  blanket),  also  a  just
compensation  fur  the  property  lie  may  abandon,  to  he  assessed  by  persons  to  he
app  anted  by  the  President  .if  the  United  states.  The  cost  of  the  emigration  of  all
such  shall  also  he  borne  by  the  United  states,  ami  good  and  suitable  ways  opened
ami  procured  for  their  comfort,  accomi   latioh,  and  support  by  the  way.  and  pro-
visions fur  twelve  months  after  their  arrival  at  the  agency;  and  to  each  person,  or
head  of  a  family,  if  he  take  along  with  him  four  persons,  shall  ho  paid  immediately
on  his  arriving  at  the  agency  and  reporting  himself  and  his  family  or  followers  as
emigrants  or  permanent  settlers,  in  addition  to  the  above,  provided  he  and  they  shall
have  ,  migrated  from  within  the  chartered  limits  of  the  st.it,  of  Georgia,  the  sum  of  fifty
dollars,  and  this  sum  in  proportion  to  any  greater  or  less  number  that  may  accompany
him  from  within  the  aforesaid  chartered  limits  of  the  State  of  Georgia.
A  Senate  amendment,  defining  the  limits  of  the  western  outlet,  was
afterward  found  to  he  impracticable  in  its  restrictions  and  was  can-
celed by  the  treaty  made  at  Fort  Gibson  in  is:;:;.1
Tin"  Washington  treaty  was  signed  by  several  delegates,  including
Sequoya,  four  of  them  signing  in  Cherokee  characters.     As  the  laws
iTreatj  of  Washington,  May  6,  1828,  Indian  Treaties,  pp  123-428,1837;  treaty  of  Fort  Gibson,  1-:;:;,
ibid.,  pp.56]  65  see  also  for  synopsis,  Eoyce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
pp  229,230,1888.


BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY NINLTEENTH    ANNUAL    REPORT      PL.    VI
TAHCHEE     ITATSh     OR     DUTCH
From  Catlin's  painting  of  183-1




t   nkv]  EMIGRATION    TO   TEXAS       1828  111
of  the  western  Cherokee  made  it  a  capital  offense  to  negotiate  any  sale
or  exchange  of  land  excepting  l>y  authority  of  council,  and  the  dele-
gates had  acted  without  such  authority,  they  were  so  doubtful  as  to
what  might  happen  on  their  return  that  the  Secretary  of  War  senl
with  them  a  letter  of  explanation  assuring  the  Cherokee  thai  their
representatives  had  acted  with  integrity  and  earnest  zeal  for  their
people  and  had  done  the  best  that  could  be  done  with  regard  to  the
treaty.  Notwithstanding  this,  they  found  the  whole  tribe  so  strongly
opposed  to  the  treaty  that  their  own  lives  and  property  were  unsafe.
The  national  council  pronounced  them  guilty  of  fraud  and  deception
and  declared  the  treaty  null  and  void,  as  having  been  made  without,
authority,  and  asked  permission  to  send  on  a  delegation  authorized  to
arrange  all  differences.1  In  the  meantime,  however,  the  treaty  had
been  ratified  within  three  weeks  of  its  conclusion,  and  thus,  hardly  ten
years  after  they  had  cleared  their  fields  on  the  Arkansas,  the  western
Cherokee  were  forced  to  abandon  their  cabins  and  plantations  and
move  once  more  into  the  wilderness.
A  considerable  number,  refusing  to  submit  to  the  treaty  or  to  trust
longer  to  guarantees  and  promises,  crossed  Red  river  into  Texas  and
joined  the  Cherokee  colony  already  located  there  by  The  Bowl,  under
Mexican  jurisdiction.  Among  those  thus  removing  was  the  noted
chief  Tahchee  (Tatsi')  or  •■Dutch,"  who  had  been  one  of  the  earliest
emigrants  to  the  Arkansas  country.  After  several  years  in  Texas,
during  which  he  led  war  parties  against  the  wilder  tribes,  he  recrossed
Red  river  and  soon  made  himself  so  conspicuous  in  raids  upon  the
Osage  that  a  reward  of  five  hundred  dollars  was  ottered  by  General
Arbuckle  for  his  capture.  To  show  his  defiance  of  the  proclamation,
he  deliberately  journeyed  to  Fori  Gibson,  attacked  a  party  of  Osage
at  a  trading-  post  near  by,  and  scalped  one  of  them  within  hearing  of
the  drums  of  the  fort.  With  rifle  in  one  hand  and  the  bleeding  scalp
in  the  other,  he  leaped  a  precipice  and  made  his  escape,  although  a
bullet  grazed  his  cheek.  On  promise  of  amnesty  and  the  withdrawal
id'  the  reward,  he  afterward  returned  and  settled,  with  his  followers,
on  the  Canadian,  southwest  of  Fort  Gibson,  establishing  a  reputation
among  army  officers  as  a  valuable  scout  and  guide.8
By  treaties  made  in  L826  and  L827  the  Creeks  had  ceded  all  their
remaining  lands  in  Georgia  and  agreed  to  remove  to  Lndian  Territory.
Some  of  these  emigrants  had  settled  alone-  the  northern  bank  of
the  Arkansas  and  on  Verdigris  river,  on  lands  later  found  to  he
within  the  limits  of  the  territory  assigned  to  the  western  Cherokee
by  the  treaty  of  L828.     This  led  to  jealousies  and  collisions  between
■  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Aim.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  !■.  248,  1888.
2  For  a  sketch  of  Tahchee,  with  portraits,  see  McKenney  and  Hall,  i,  pp.
American  Indians  ii,  pp.  121,122,  1844.    Washburn  also  mentions  the  emigration  to  Texas
upon  the  treaty  of  1828  i  Reminiscences,  p.  -ii'.  1869).


142  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  two  tribes,  and  in  order  to  settle  the  difficulty  the  United  States
convened  a  joint  council  of  ("recks  and  Cherokee  at  Fort  Gibson,  with
the  result  that  separate  treaties  were  concluded  with  each  on  February
14.  1833,  defining-  their  respective  bounds  to  the  satisfaction  of  all
concerned.  By  this  arrangement  the  upper  Verdigris  was  confirmed
t<>  the  Cherokee,  and  the  Creeks  who  had  settled  along  that  portion  of
the  stream  agreed  to  remove  to  Creek  territory  immediately  adjoining
on  the  south.'
By  the  treaty  made  on  this  occasion  with  the  Cherokee  the  bound-
aries of  the  tract  of  seven  million  acres  granted  by  the  treaty  of  L828
are  denned  so  as  to  correspond  with  the  present  boundaries  of  the
Cherokee  country  in  Indian  territory,  together  with  a  strip  two  miles
wide  along  the  northern  border,  which  was  afterward  annexed  to  the
state  ot'  Kansas  liy  the  treaty  of  1866.  A  tract  in  the  northeastern corner,  between  Neosho  or  Grand  river  and  the  Missouri  line,  was  set
apart  for  the  use  of  the  Seneca  and  several  other  remnants  of  tribes
removed  from  their  original  territories.  The  western  outlet  estab-
lished by  the  treaty  of  1828  was  reestablished  as  a  western  extension
from  the  seven-million-acre  tract  thus  bounded,  being  what  was  after-
ward known  as  the  Cherokee  strip  or  outlet  plus  the  two-mile  strip
extending  westward  along  the  south  line  of  Kansas.
After  describing  the  boundaries  of  the  main  residence  tract,  the  first
article  continues:
In  addition  to  the  seven  millions  of  acres  of  land  thus  provided  for  and  bounded
the  United  States  further  guarantee  to  the  Cherokee  nation  a  perpetual  outlet  west
and  a  tree  and  unmolested  use  of  all  the  country  lying  west  of  the  western  boundary
of  said  seven  millions  of  acres,  as  far  west  as  the  sovereignty  <>f  the  United  States  and
their  right  ef  soil  extend — provided,  however,  that  if  the  saline  or  salt  plain  on  the
great  western  prairie  shall  fall  within  said  limits  prescribed  for  said  outlet  the  right
is  reserved  to  the  United  States  to  permit  other  tribes  of  red  men  to  get  salt  on  said
plain  in  common  with  the  Cherokees — and  letters  patent  shall  be  issued  by  the
United  staters  as  soon  as  iiractieable  for  the  lands  hereby  guaranteed.
The  third  article  cancels,  at  the  particular  request  of  the  Cherokee,
that  article  of  the  treaty  of  1838  by  which  the  government  was  to  give
to  the  Cherokee  a  set  of  laws  and  a  surveyor  to  survey  lands  for  indi-
viduals, when  so  desired  by  the  Cherokee.2
Their  differences  with  the  Creeks  having  been  thus  adjusted,  the
Arkansas  Cherokee  proceeded  to  occupy  the  territory  guaranteed  to
them,  where  they  were  joined  a  few  years  later  by  their  expatriated
kinsmen  from  the  east.  By  tacit  agreement  some  of  the  Creeks  who
had  settled  within  the  Cherokee  bounds  were  permitted  to  remain.
Among  these  were  several  families  of  Uchee — an  incorporated  tribe
i Treaties  at  Fort  Gibson.  February  14.  1833,  with  Creeks  and  Cherokee,  in  Indian  Treaties,  pp.
56]    "■'.'.  1837.
s Treaty  of  1833,  Indian  Treaties,  pp.  561-665,1837;  Etoyce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau
of  Ethnology,  pp.  249-253.  1888;  see  also  Treaty  of  New  Eehota,  1835,  ante,  pp.  123-125.


BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    VII
SPRING-FROG    OR    TOOANTUH      DU'TSU'i
i  From  McKcnney  and  Ball's  copy  of  the  original  painting  ol  aboul  L830)




THE    SPANISH    GKAN1  143
of  the  Creek  confederacy  who  had  fixed  their  residence  al  the  spot
where  the  town  of  Tahlequah  \\:i-  aftei'ward  established-  They
remained  here  until  swept  off  by  smallpox  some  sixty  years  ago. '
THE    TEXAS    BAND       L817    1900
As  already  stated,  a  band  of  western  Cheixikee  under  Chief  Bowl,
dissatisfied  \\  itli  the  delay  in  fulfilling  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  L817,
bad  Left  Arkansas  and  crossed  Red  river  into  Texas,  then  under
Mexican  jurisdiction,  where  the}  were  joined  a  few  years  later  by
Tahchee  and  other-  of  the  western  band  who  were  opposed  to  the
treat}  of  L828.  Here  they  united  with  other  refugee  Indians  from
the  United  States,  forming  together  a  loose  confederacy  known  after-
ward  as  "the  Cherokee   and    their  associated   bands,"  <   sisting  of
Cherokee,  Shawano,  Delaware,  Kickapoo,  Quapaw,  Choctaw,  Biloxi,
"Iawanie"  (Heyowani,  Yowani),  "Unataqua"  (Nada'ko  or  Ana-
darko,  another  Caddo  subtribe),  "Tahookatookie"  (?),  Alabama  (a
(reek  subtribe),  and  "Cooshatta"  (Koasa'ti,  another  Creek  subtribe).
The  Cherokee  being  the  largest  and  most  important  band,  their  child'. Bowl — known  to  the  whites  as  Colonel  Bowles— was  regarded  as  the
chief  and  principal  man  of  them  all.
The  refugees  settled  chiefly  alone-  Angelina,  Neches,  and  Trinity rivers  in  eastern  Texas,  where  Bowl  endeavored  to  obtain  a  grant  of
land  for  their  use  from  the  Mexican  government.  According  to  the
Texan  historians  they  were  tacitly  permitted  to  occupy  the  country
and  hope-  were  held  out  that  a  grant  would  lie  issued,  hut  the  papers
had  not  been  perfected  when  the  Texas  revolution  began.2  According
to  the  Cherokee  statement  the  grant  was  actually  issued  and  the  Span-
ish document  inclosed  in  a  tin  box  was  on  the  person  of  Bowl  when  he
was  killed.3  On  complaint  of  some  of  the  American  colonists  in  Texas
President  Jackson  issued  a  proclamation  forbidding  any  Indian-  to
cross  the  Sabine  river  from  the  United  States.4
In  L826-27  a  dissatisfied  American  colony  in  eastern  Texas,  under  the
leader-hip  of  Hayden  Edward-,  organized  what  was  known  a-  the
"Fredonia  rebellion"  against  the  Mexican  government.  To  secure the  alliance  of  the  Cherokee  and  their  confederates  the  Americans
entered  into  a  treaty  by  which  the  Indians  were  guaranteed   the  lands
■  Author's  personal  information.  In  189]  the  author  opened  two  Uehee  graves  on  the  grounds  of
Cornelius  Boudinot,  at  Tahlequah,  finding  with  one  body  a  number  of  French,  Spanish,  and  Imeri
can  silver  coins  wrapped  in  cloth  and  deposited  in  two  packages  on  each  sidi  of  the  head  They  are
now  in  the  National  Museum  at  Washington,
-  Bonnell,  Topographic  Description  of  Texas,  p,  ill;  Austin,  1840;  Thrall,  History  of  Texas,  p.  58; New  York,  1876.
'Author's  personal  information  from  J.  D.  Wafford  and  other  old  Cherokee  residents  and  fr    recenl Cherokee  delegates.  Bancroft  agrees  with  Bonnell  and  Thrall  that  no  grant  was  formally  issued,
but  states  that  the  Cherokee  chiei  established  In*  people  in  Texas  "  confiding  in  promises  made  to
bim,  and  a  conditional  agreement  in  1822  '  with  the  Spanish  governor  Historj  "i  the  North  Mexican
States  and  Texas,  u,  p  103,  1889).  It  i>  probable  that  the  paper  carried  to  Bowl  was  the  later
Houston  treaty.    See  next  page.  'Thrall,  op.  cit,,s,  p.  58.


144  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ass.19
occupied  by  them,  but  without  specification  as  to  boundaries.  The
Fredonia  movement  .soon  collapsed  and  nothing  tangible  seems  to  have
come  of  the  negotiations.1
In  the  fall  of  1835  the  Texan  revolution  began,  resulting  in  the  seces-
sion of  Texas  from  Mexico  and  her  establishment  as  an  independent
republic  until  annexed  later  to  the  United  States.  General  Samuel
Houston,  a  leading  member  of  the  revolutionary  body,  was  an  old
friend  of  the  Cherokee,  and  set  forth  so  strongly  the  claims  of  them
and  their  confederates  that  an  act  was  passed  by  the  convention  pledg-
ing to  these  tribes  all  the  lands  which  they  had  held  under  the  Mexican
government.  In  accordance  with  this  act  General  Houston  and  John
Forbes  were  appointed  to  hold  a  treaty  with  the  Cherokee  and  their
associated  bands.  They  met  the  chiefs,  including  Bowl  and  Big-mush
(( .atun'wa'll.  "Hard-mush"), of  the  Cherokee,  at  Bowl's  village  on  Feb-
ruary 23,  L836,  and  concluded  a  formal  trinity  by  which  the  Cherokee
and  their  allies  received  a  fee  simple  title  to  all  the  land  lying  "  west  of
the  San  Antonio  road  and  beginning  on  the  west  at  a  point  where  the
said  road  crosses  the  river  Angelina,  and  running  up  said  river  until
it  reaches  the  mouth  of  the  first  large  creek  below  the  great  Shawnee
village,  emptying  into  the  said  river  from  the  northeast,  thence  run-
ning with  said  creek  to  its  main  source  and  from  thence  a  due  north
line  to  the  Sabine  and  with  .said  river  west.  Then  starting  where  the
San  Antonio  road  crosses  the  Angelina  and  with  said  road  to  where  it
crosses  the  Nechesand  thence  running  up  the  east  side  of  said  river  in
a  northwest  direction."  The  historian  remarks  that  the  description  is
somewhat  vague,  but  is  a  literal  transcription  from  the  treaty.2  The
territory  thus  assigned  was  about  equivalent  to  the  present  Cherokee
county.  Texas.
The  treaty  provoked  such  general  dissatisfaction  among  the  Texans
that  it  was  not  presented  to  the  convention  for  ratification.  General
Houston  became  President  of  Texas  in  November.  1836,  but  notwith-
standing all  his  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  Cherokee,  the  treaty  was
rejected  by  the  Texas  senate  in  secret  session  on  December  It',.  1837
Texas  having  in  the  meantime  achieved  victorious  independence  was
now  in  position  to  repudiate  her  engagements  with  the  Indians,  which
she  did.  not  only  with  the  Cherokee,  but  with  the  Comanche  and
other  wild  tribes,  wdiich  had  been  induced  to  remain  neutral  during
the  struggle  on  assurance  of  being  secured  in  possession  of  their
lands.
In  the  meantime  President  Houston  was  unremitting  in  his  effort  to
secure  the  ratification  of  the  Cherokee  treaty,  but  without  success.
On  the  other  hand  the  Cherokee  were  accused  of  various  depreda-
tions, and  it  was  asserted  that  they  had  entered  into  an  agreement  with
i  Thrall,  Texas,  p.  46, 1879.  ;  Ibid.,  p.  143,  1840.
-Bunnell,  Te.xiis,  pp.  14J.14::.  1840.


EXPULSION     FROM     l  i:\.\s  — 1839  1  1  5
Mexico  by  which  they  were  to  be  secured  in  the  territory  in  question
on  condition  of  assisting  to  drive  oul  the  Americans.1  The  cha
runic  rather  late  in  the  day.  and  it  was  evident  thai  Presidenl  Houston
put  no  faith  in  it,  as  be  still  continued  his  efforts  in  behalf  of  the
( Iherokee,  e\  en  so  far  as  to  order  the  boundary  line  to  be  run.  accord-
ing to  the  terms  of  the  treaty  i  to).
In  December,  1838,  Houston  was  succeeded  as  Presidenl  l>\  Mirabeau
B.  Lamar,  who  at  once  announced  his  intention  to  expel  every  Indian
tribe  from  Texas,  declaring  in  his  inaugural  message  that  "the  sword
<hould  mark  the  boundaries  of  the  republic."  At  this  time  the  Indians
in  eastern  Texas,  including  the  ( Iherokee  and  their  twelve  confederated
bands  and  some  others,  were  estimated  at  L,800  warriors,  or  perhaps
8,1   persons/'
A  small  force  of  troops  sent  to  take  possession  of  the  salt  springs  in
the  Indian  country  at  the  head  of  the  Neches  was  notified  by  Bowl
that  such  action  would  be  resisted.  The  Indians  were  then  informed
that  they  musl  prepare  to  leave  the  country  in  the  fall,  bul  thai  they
would  be  paid  for  the  impi-ovements  abandoned.  In  the  meantime
the  neighboring  Mexicans  made  an  effort  to  free  themselves  from
Texan  rule  and  sent  overtures  to  the  Indians  to  make  common  cause
with  them.  This  being  discovered,  the  crisis  was  prei  ipitated,  and  a
commission  consisting  of  General  Albert  Sidney  Johnston  (secretary
of  war  of  the  republic),  Vice-President  Burnet,  and  some  other
officials,  backed  up  by  several  regiments  of  troops,  was  sent  to  the
Cherokee  village  on  Angelina  river- to  demand  of  the  Indians  that  they
remove  at  once  across  the  border.  The  Indians  refused  and  were
attacked  and  defeated  on  July  L5,  L839,  by  the  Texan  troops  under
command  of  General  Douglas.  They  were  pursued  and  a  second
engagement  took  place  the  next  morning,  resulting  in  the  death  of
Bowl  himself  and  his  assistant  chief  <  iatfuYwa'li.  "Hard-mush,"  and  the dispersion  of  the  Indian  forces,  with  a  loss  in  the  two  engagements  of
about  55  killed  and  80  wounded,  the  Texan  loss  being  comparatively
trifling.  The  first  fight  took  place al  a  hill  close  to  the  main  Cherokee
village  on  the  Angelina,  where  the  Indian-  made  a  stand  and  defended
their  position  well  for  some  time.  The  second  occurred  at  a  ravine
near  Neches  river,  where  they  wire  intercepted  in  their  retreat.  Says
Thrall,  "After  this  fight  the  Indians  abandoned  Texas,  leaving  their
tine  lands  in  possession  of  the  w  hites."  '
By  these  two  defeats  the  forces  of  the  Cherokee  and  their  confeder-
ates were  completely  broken  up.  A  part  of  the  Cherokee  recrossed
Red  river  and  rejoined  their  kinsmen  in  Indian  territory,  bringing
with  them  the  blood-stained  canister  containing  the  patent  for  their
'Bonm-ll.  Texas,  pp.  1 1  :.  1  il.
I     pp.  144, 146.
<  Bonnell,  op.  eit.,  pp.  116-150;  Thrall,  op.  'it.,  pp.  118-120.
19    ETH— 01   10


146  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Texas  land,  which  Row]  had  carried  about  with  him  since  the  treaty
with  Houston  and  which  he  had  upon  his  person  when  shot.  It  is
still  kept  in  the  Nation.'  Others,  with  the  Kickapoo,  Delawares,
and  Caddo,  scattered  in  small  hands  along  the  western  Texas  frontier,
where  they  were  occasionally  heard  from  afterward.  On  Christmas
day  of  the  same  year  a  fight  occurred  on  Cherokee  creek.  San  Saba
count}',  in  which  several  Indians  were  killed  and  a  number  of  women
and  children  captured,  including  the  wife  and  family  of  the  dead  chief
Bowl.2  Those  of  the  Cherokee  wTho  did  not  return  to  Indian  territory
gradually  drifted  down  into  Mexico,  where  some  hundreds  of  them
are  now  permanently  and  prosperously  domiciled  far  south  in  the
neighborhood  of  Guadalajara  and  LakeChapala,  communication  being
still  kept  up  through  occasional  visits  from  their  kinsmen  in  the  terri-
tory.3
THE    CHEROKKE    NATION    IN    THE    WEST — 1840-1900
With  the  final  removal  of  the  Cherokee  from  their  native  country
and  their  reunion  and  reorganization  under  new  conditions  in  Indian
Territory  in  L840  their  aboriginal  period  properly  comes  to  a  close
and  the  rest  may  be  dismissed  in  a  few  paragraphs  as  of  concern  rather
to  the  local  historian  than  to  the  ethnologist.  Having  traced  for  three
full  centuries  their  gradual  evolution  from  a  savage  tribe  to  a  civilized
Christian  nation,  with  a  national  constitution  and  national  press  printed
in  their  own  national  alphabet,  we  can  afford  to  leave  the  rest  to
others,  the  principal  materials  being  readily  accessible  in  the  Cherokee
national  archives  at  Tahlequah,  in  the  tiles  of  the  Gheroket  Advocate
and  other  newspapers  published  in  the  Nation,  and  in  the  annual
reports  and  other  documents  of  the  Indian  office.
For  many  years  the  hunter  and  warrior  had  been  giving  place  to  the
farmer  and  mechanic,  ami  the  forced  expatriation  made  the  change
complete  and  final.  Torn  from  their  native  streams  and  mountains,
their  council  fires  extinguished  and  their  townhouses  burned  behind
them,  and  transported  bodily  to  a  far  distant  country  where  every-
thing was  new  and  strange,  they  were  obliged  perforce  to  forego  the
old  life  and  adjust  themselves  to  changed  surroundings.  The  ballplay
was  neglected  and  the  green-corn  dance  proscribed,  while  the  heroic
tradition  of  former  days  became  a  fading  memory  or  a  tale  to  amuse  a
child.  Instead  of  ceremonials  and  peace  councils  we  hear  now"  of  rail-
road deals  and  contracts  with  cattle  syndicates,  and  instead  of  the  old
warrior  chiefs  who  had  made  the  Cherokee  name  a  terror — Oconostota,
Hanging-maw,  Poublehead.  and  Pathkiller — we  find  the  destinies  of  the
1  Author's  personal  information  from  .1.  I'.  Wafford  and  other  old  western  Cherokee,  and  recent
Cherokee  delegates;  by  some  this  is  said  u>  have  been  :i  Mexican  patent,  lint  it  is  probably  the  "ik-
given  by  Texas.    See  ante,  i>.  143.
"Thrall,  Texas,  p.  120,  1876.
3  Author's  personal  information  from  Mexican  and  Cherokee  sources


REORGANIZATION     IN    THE    WEST       1840  117
nation  guided  henceforth  by  shrewd  mixed-blood  politicians,  bearing
white  men's  names  and  speaking  the  white  man's  language,  and  fre
quentlj  with  hardlj  enough  Indian  blood  to  show  itself  in  the  features.
The  change  was  no<  instantaneous,  nor  is  ii  even  yet  complete,  for
although  tin-  tendency  is  constantly  away  from  the  old  things,  and
although  frequent  intermarriages  are  rapidlj  blea'ching  out  the  brown
of  the  Indian  skin,  there  are  still  several  thousand  full-blood  Chero-
kee —enough  to  constitute  a  large  1 1-  i  1  >*  •  if  set  off  by  themselves  who
speak  only  their  native  language  and  in  secret  bow  down  to  the  nature-
gods  <>!'  their  fathers.  Here,  as  in  other  lands,  the  conservative
element  has  taken  refuge  in  the  mountain  districts,  while  the  mixed-
bloods  and  the  adopted  whites  are  chiefly  on  the  richer  low  grounds
and  in  the  railr   I  towns.
On  the  reorganization  of  the  united  Nation  the  council  ground  at
Tahlequah  was  designated  as  the  seat  of  government,  and  the  present
town  was  soon  afterward  laid  out  upon  the  spot, taking  its  name  from
the  old  Cherokee  town  of  Talikwa,',  or  Tellico,  in  Tennessee.  The
missions  were  reestablished,  the  Acfrvocatt  was  revived,  and  the  work
of  civilization  was  again  taken  up,  though  under  great  difficulties,  as
continued  removals  and  persecutions,  with  the  awful  suffering  and
mortality  of  the  last  great  emigration,  had  impoverished  and  more
than  decimated  the  Nation  and  worn  out  the  courage  even  of  the
bravest.  The  bitterness  engendered  by  the  New  Echota  treaty  led
to  a  series  of  murders  and  assassinations  and  other  acts  of  outlawry.
amounting  almost  to  civil  war  between  the  Ross  and  Ridge  factions,
until  the  Government  was  at  last  obliged  to  interfere.  The  Old  Set-
tler- also  had  their  grievances  and  complaints  against  the  newcomer-.
so  that  the  history  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  for  the  next  twenty  years
i-  largely  a  chronicle  of  factional  quarrels,  through  which  civilization
and  every  good  work  actually  retrograded  behind  the  condition  of  a
generation  earlier.
Sequoya,  who  had  occupied  a  prominent  position  in  the  affairs  of
the  Old  Settlers  and  assisted  much  in  the  reorganization  of  the  Nati
had  become  seized  with  a  desire  to  make  linguistic  investigations  among
the  remote  tribes,  very  probably  with  a  view  of  devising  a  universal
Indian  alphabet.  His  mind  dwelt  also  on  the  old  tradition  of  a  lost
band  of  Cherokee  living  somewhere  toward  the  western  mountains.
In  1841  and  L842,  with  a  few  Cherokee  companions  and  with  hi-  pro-
visions and  papers  loaded  in  an  ox  cart,  he  made  several  journey-  into
the  West,  received  everywhere  with  kindness  by  even  the  wildest  t  ribes.
Disappointed  in  his  philologic  results,  he  started  out  in  L843  in  quest
of  the  lost  Cherokee,  who  were  believed  to  be  somewhere  in  northern
Mexico,  but.  being  now  an  old  man  and  worn  out  by  hardship,  he  sank
under  the  effort  and   died     alone  and  unattended,  it    i<   said — near  the


148  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
village  of  San  Fernando,  Mexico,  in  August  of  that  year.  Rumors
having  come  of  his  helpless  condition,  a  party  had  been  sent  out  from
the  Nation  to  bring  him  back,  but  arrived  too  late  to  find  him  alive.
A  pension  of  three  hundred  dollars,  previously  voted  to  him  by  the
Nation,  was  continued  to  his  widow — the  only  literary  pension  in  the
United  States.  Besides  a  wife  he  left  two  sons  and  a  daughter.1
Sequoyah  district  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  was  named  in  his  honor,  and
the  great  trees  of  California  (Sequoia  gigantea)  also  preserve  his
memory.
In  L846  a  treaty  was  concluded  at  Washington  by  which  the  con-
flicting claims  of  the  Old  Settlers  and  later  emigrants  were  adjusted,
reimbursement  was  promised  for  sums  unjustly  deducted  from  the
five-million-dollar  payment  guaranteed  under  the  treaty  of  1835,  and
a  general  amnesty  was  proclaimed  for  all  past  offenses  within  the
Nation."  Final  settlement  of  the  treaty  claims  has  not  yet  been  made,
and  the  matter  is  still  a  subject  of  litigation,  including  all  the  treaties
and  agreements  up  to  the  present  date.
In  1859  the  devoted  missionary  Samuel  Worcester,  author  of
numerous  translations  and  first  organizer  of  the  Advocate,  died  at
Park  Hill  mission,  in  the  Cherokee  Nation,  after  thirty-five  years
spent  in  the  service  of  the  Cherokee,  having  suffered  chains,  impris-
onment, and  exile  for  their  sake.3
The  breaking  out  of  the  civil  war  in  1861  found  the  Cherokee
divided  in  sentiment.  Being  slave  owners,  like  the  other  Indians
removed  from  the  southern  states,  and  surrounded  by  southern  influ-
ences, the  agents  in  charge  being  themselves  southern  sympathizers,
a  considerable  party  in  each  of  the  tribes  was  disposed  to  take  active
part  with  the  Confederacy.  The  old  Ridge  part}',  headed  by  Stand
Watie  and  supported  by  the  secret  secession  organization  known  as
the  Knights  of  the  Golden  Circle,  declared  for  the  Confederacy.  The
National  party,  headed  by  John  Ross  and  supported  by  the  patriotic
organization  known  as  the  Kitoowah  society — whose  members  were
afterward  known  as  Pin  Indians — declared  for  strict  neutrality.  At
last,  however,  the  pressure  became  too  strong  to  be  resisted,  and  on
October  T,  L'861,  a  treaty  was  concluded  at  Tahlequah,  with  General Albert  Pike,  commissioner  for  the  Confederate  states,  by  which  the
Cherokee  Nation  cast  its  lot  with  the  Confederacy,  as  the  Creeks,
Choctaw,  Chickasaw,  Seminole,  Osage,  Comanche,  and  several  smaller
tribes  had  already  done.4
iW.  A.  Phillips.  Sequoyah,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  September,  1*70;  Foster.  Sequoyah,  1885;  Royc.e, Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Hep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  302,  1888;  letter  of  William  P.  Ross,  former
editor  of  Cherokee  Advocate,  March  11, 18S9,  in  archives  of  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology;  Cherokee
Advocate,  October  19,  1844,  November  J,  1844,  and  March  6,  1845;  author's  personal  information.  San Fernando  seems  to  have  been  a  small  village  in  Chihuahua,  but  is  not  shown  on  the  maps.
-For  full  discussion  see  Royee,  op.  eit.,  pp. 298-812.
3  Pilling,  Bibliography  of  the  Iroquoian  Languages  i  bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology),  p.  17  1, 1888.
<See  treaties  with  Cherokee, October  7,1861,and  with  other  tribes.in  Confederate  States  Statutes
at  Large,  1804;  Royee,  op.  cit.,  pp.  324-828;  Greeley,  American  Conflict,  n,  pp.  30-31.  1866;  Reports  of
Indian  Commissioner  for  i860  to  1862.


thk   u\  11.    w  \i:  149
Two  Cherokee  regiments  were  raised  for  the  Confederate  service,
under  c   mand  of  Stand  Watie  and  Colonel  Drew,  respectively,  the
former  being  commissioned  as  brigadier-general.  Thej  participated
in  several  engagements,  chief  among  them  being  the  battle  of  Pea
Ridge,  Arkansas,  on  .March  7.  1m'>2.'  In  the  following  summer  the
Union  forces  entered  the  Cherokee  country  and  senl  a  proposition  i<>
Ross,  urging  him  to  repudiate  the  treaty  with  the  Confederate  states,
but  the  offer  was  indignantlj  declined.  Shortly  afterward,  however,
the  men  of  Drew's  regiment,  finding  themselves  unpaid  and  generally
neglected  by  their  allies,  went  over  almost  in  a  body  to  the  Union
side,  thus  compelling  Ross  to  make  an  arrangement  with  the  Union
commander,  Colonel  Weir.  Leaving  the  Cherokee  country,  Ross
retired  to  Philadelphia,  from  which  be  did  not  return  until  the  close
of  the  war.  In  the  meantime  Indian  Territory  was  ravaged  alter-
nately by  contending  factions  and  armed  bodies,  and  thousands  of
loyal  fugitives  were  obliged  to  lake  refuge  in  Kansas,  where  they
were  eared  for  by  the  government.  Among  these,  at  the  close  of  1862,
were  two  thousand  Cherokee.     In  the  following  spring  thej  were  sent
hack  to  their  homes  under  an   1  escort  to  give  them  an  opportunity
to  put  in  a  crop,  seeds  and  tools  being  furnished  for  the  purpose,  hut
had  hardly  begun  work  when  they  were  forced  to  retire  by  the
approach  of  Stand  Watie  and  his  regiment  of  Confederate  Cherokee,
estimated  at  seven  hundred  men.  Stand  Watie  and  his  men.  with  the
( !onfederate  ( Ireeks  and  others,  scoured  the  country  at  will,  destroying
or  carrying  off  everything  belonging  to  the  loyal  Cherokee,  who  had
now.  to  the  number  of  nearly  seven  thousand,  taken  refuge  at  Fort
Gibson.  Refusing  to  lake  sides  againsl  a  government  which  was  still
unable  to  protect  them,  they  were  forced  to  see  all  the  prosperous
accumulations  of  twenty  years  of  industry  swept  off  in  this  guerrilla
warfare.  In  stock  alone  their  losses  were  estimated  at  more  than
300,    head.
"The  events  of  the  war  brought  to  them  more  of  desolation  and
ruin  than  perhaps  to  any  other  community.  Raided  and  sacked  alter-
nately, not  only  by  the  Confederate  and  Union  forces,  bul  I » s  the  vin-
dictive ferocity  and  hate  of  their  own  factional  divisions,  their  country
became  a  blackened  and  desolate  waste.  Driven  from  comfortable
home-,  exposed  to  want,  misery,  and  the  element-,  they  perished  like
sheep  in  a  -now  storm.  Their  houses,  fence-,  and  other  improve-
ments were  burned,  their  orchard-  destroyed,  their  flocks  and  herds
slaughtered  or  driven  off,  their  schools  broken  up,  their  schoolhouses
given  to  the  flames,  and  their  churches  and  public  buildings  sub-
jected to  a  similar  fate;  and  that  entire  portion  of  their  country  which
'  In  this  battle  the  Con  assisted  by  from  4,000  to  5,000  Indians  of  the  southern  ■ i     erokee,  under  command  of  General  Albert  Pike.
-  l:, >yce  •  in,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnolog;    i
p.331.


150  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
had  been  occupied  by  their  settlements  was  distinguishable  from  the
virgin  prairie  only  by  the  scorched  and  blackened  chimneys  and  the
plowed  but  now  neglected  fields."1
After  rive  years  of  desolation  the  Cherokee  emerged  from  the  war
with  their  numbers  reduced  from  21,000  to  14,000,a  and  their  whole
country  in  ashes.  On  July  19,  1866,  by  a  treaty  concluded  at  Tahle-
quah.  the  nation  was  received  back  into  the  protection  of  the  United
States,  a  general  amnesty  was  proclaimed,  and  all  confiscations  on
account  of  the  war  prohibited;  slavery  was  abolished  without  compen-
sation to  former  owners,  and  all  negroes  residing  within  the  Nation
were  admitted  to  full  Cherokee  citizenship.  By  articles  L5  and  16
permission  was  given  tin1  United  States  to  settle  friendly  Indians
within  the  Cherokee  home  country  or  the  Cherokee  strip  by  consent
and  purchase  from  the  Nation.  By  article  17  the  Cherokee  sold  the
800,000-acre  tract  in  Kansas  secured  by  the  treaty  of  1835,  together
with  a  two-mile  strip  running  along  the  southern  border  of  Kansas,
and  thereafter  to  be  included  within  the  limits  of  that  state,  thus  leav-
ing the  Cherokee  country  as  it  was  before  the  recent  cession  of  the
Cherokee  strip.  Payment  was  promised  for  spoliations  by  United
States  troops  during  the  war;  and  $3,000  were  to  be  paid  out  of  the
Cherokee  funds  to  the  Reverend  Evan  Jones,  then  disabled  and  in
poverty,  as  a  reward  for  forty  years  of  faithful  missionary  labors.
By  article  26  ""the  United  States  guarantee  to  the  Cherokees  the  quiet
and  peaceable  possession  of  their  country  and  protection  against
domestic  feuds  and  insurrection  as  well  as  hostilities  of  other  tribes.
They  shall  also  be  protected  from  intrusion  by  all  unauthorized  citi-
zens of  the  United  States  attempting  to  settle  on  their  lands  or  reside
in  their  territory."3
The  missionary,  Reverend  Evan  Jones,  who  had  followed  the  Cher-
okee into  exile,  and  his  son,  John  B.  Jones,  had  been  admitted  to
Cherokee  citizenship  the  year  before  by  vote  of  the  Nation.  The  act
conferring  this  recognition  recites  that  "we  do  bear  witness  that  they
have  done  their  work  well."*
John  Ross,  now  an  old  man,  had  been  unable  to  attend  this  treaty,
being  present  at  the  time  in  Washington  on  business  for  his  people.
Before  its  ratification  he  died  in  that  city  on  August  1,  1866,  at  the
age  of  seventy-seven  years,  fifty-seven  of  which  had  been  given  to
the  service  of  his  Nation.  No  finer  panegyric  was  ever  pronounced
than  the  memorial  resolution  passed  by  the  Cherokee  Nation  on  learn-
ing of  his  death."'  Notwithstanding  repeated  attempts  to  subvert  his authority,  his  people  had  remained  steadfast   in  their  fidelity  to  him,
1  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  cit..  p.  376.
- 1 1 1 i <  1 . .  p.  376.    A  census  of  1867  siw~  them  13,566  I  ibid.,  p.  :'.">l  I.
»See  synopsis  and  full  discussion  in  Royce,  op.  cit..  pp.  334-340.
*  Act  of  Citizenship,  November  7,  1865,  Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  p.  it.';  St.  Louis,  1868.
&See  Resolutions  of  Honor,  ibid.,  pp.  137-140.


BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNL METEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    VIII
m I
JOHN     ROSS    (GU'WISGUWI'.
j  and  II  ill's  i  ..|-  of  il   riginal  painting  ol  aboul  183  i




mooney]  FIRST    RAILROAD  —  LITERAR'X     REVIVAL       L870  151
and  be  died,  as  be  bad  lived  for  nearly  forty  years,  the  official!;  recog
nixed  chief  of  the  Nation.  With  repeated  opportunities  to  enrich
himself  at  the  expense  of  his  tribe,  he  died  a  poor  man.  His  bodj
was  brought  back  and  interred  in  the  territorj  of  the  Nation.  In
remembrance  of  the  great  chief  one  of  the  nine  districts  of  the  Chero-
kee Nation  has  been  called  by  his  Indian  name.  Cooweescoowee  I  t6).
Under  the  provisions  of  the  late  treaty  the  1  >ela wares  in  Kansas,  to
the  number  of  985,  removed  t<>  Indian  territory  in  1867  and  became
incorporated  as  citizens  <d'  the  Chei-okee  Nation.  They  were  followed in  1870  by  the  Shawano,  chiefly  also  from  Kansas,  to  the  number  of
770.1  These  immigrants  settled  chiefly  along  the  Verdigris,  in  the
northwestern  part  of  the  Nation.  Under  the  same  treaty  the  Osage,
Kaw,  Paw  nee.  Ponca,  <  )to  and  Missouri,  and  Tonkawa  were  afterward
settled  (in  the  western  extension  known  then  as  the  Cherokee  strip.
The  captive  Nez  Perces  of  Joseph's  hand  werealso  temporarily  located
there,  but  have  since  been  removed  to  the  states  of  Washington  and
Idaho.
In  1870  the  Missouri,  Kansas  and  Texas  railway,  a  branch  of  the
Union  Pacific  system,  was  constructed  through  the  lands  of  the  Chero-
kee Nation  under  an  agreement  ratified  by  the  Government,  it  being
the  first  railroad  to  enter  that  country.-'  Several  others  have  since been  constructed  or  projected.
The  same  year  saw  a  Cherokee  literary  revival.  The  publication  of
the  Advocate,  which  had  been  suspended  since  some  years  before  the
war,  was  resumed,  and  by  authority  of  the  Nation  John  B.  Jones
began  the  preparation  of  a  series  of  schoolbooks  in  the  Cherokee
language  and  alphabet  for  the  benefit  of  those  children  who  knew  no
English.3 In  the  spring  of  L881  a  delegation  from  the  Cherokee  Nation  visited
tin  East  Cherokee  still  remaining  in  the  mountains  of  North  Carolina
and  extended  to  them  a  cordial  and  urgent  imitation  to  remove  and
incorporate  upon  equal  terms  with  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  the  Indian
territory,  [n  consequence  several  parties  of  East  Cherokee,  number-
ing in  all  161  persons,  removed  during  the  year  to  the  western  Nation.
the  expense  being  paid  by  the  Federal  government.  <  >thers  afterwards
applied  for  assistance  to  remove,  but  as  no  further  appropriation  was
made  for  the  purpose  nothing  more  was  done.*  iii  1883  the  East
Cherokee  brought  suit  for  a  proportionate  division  of  the  Cherokee
funds  and  other  interests  under  previous  treaties,5  but  their  claim  was
     i    tee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann. Rep. Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  356-358    1888    Constitution  and
Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  pp.  277-284;  St.  Louis,  1875.
-Ruviv,  op.  ril
'Foster,  Sequoyah, pp.  1 17.  148,  1885;  Pilling, Iroquoian  Bibliography,  1888, articles"  Chero
eate"  and  "John  B.  Jones."  Tbescl  to  have  ended  with  the  arithmetic— cause,
as  the  Cherokee  national  superintendent  ol  irhiteman." -n'U'T  H.Price,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.lxv,1881,and  p.  lxx,  1882;  see  also  p.  175.
» Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  Ixi


152  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth. a.nn.19
finally  decided  adversely  three  years  later  on  appeal  to  the  Supreme
Court.1 In  L889  the  Cherokee  female  seminary  was  completed  at  Tahlequah
at  a  cost  of  over  $60,000,  supplementing  the  work  of  the  male  sem-
inary, built  some  years  before  at  a  cost  of  $90,000.  The  Cherokee
Nation  was  now  appropriating  annually  over  $80,000  for  school  pur-
poses, including  the  support  of  the  two  seminaries,  an  orphan  asylum,
and  over  one  hundred  primary  schools,  besides  which  there  were  a
number  of  mission  schools.2
For  a  number  of  years  the  pressure  for  the  opening  of  Indian  terri-
tory to  white  settlement  had  been  growing  in  strength.  Thousands
of  intruders  had  settled  themselves  upon  the  lands  of  each  of  the
five  civilized  tribes,  where  they  remained  upon  various  pretexts  in
spite  of  urgent  and  repeated  appeals  to  the  government  by  the
Indians  for  their  removal.  Under  treaties  with  the  five  civilized
tribe-,  the  right  to  decide  citizenship  or  residence  claims  belonged  to
the  tribes  concerned,  but  the  intruders  had  at  last  become  so  numerous
and  strong  that  they  had  formed  an  organization  among  themselves  to
pass  upon  their  own  claims,  and  others  that  might  lie  submitted  to
them,  with  attorneys  and  ample  funds  to  defend  each  claim  in  outside
courts  against  the  decision  of  the  tribe.  At  the  same  time  the  Gov-
ernment policy  was  steadily  toward  the  reduction  or  complete  breaking
up  of  Indian  reservations  and  the  allotment  of  lands  to  the  Indians  in
severalty,  with  a  view  to  their  final  citizenship,  and  the  opening  of
the  surplus  lands  to  white  settlement.  As  a  part  of  the  same  policy
the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  courts  was  gradually  being
extended  over  the  Indian  country,  taking  cognizance  of  many  things
hitherto  considered  by  the  Indian  courts  under  former  treaties  with
the  United  States.  Against  all  this  the  Cherokee  and  other  civilized
tribes  protested,  but  without  avail.  To  add  to  the  irritation,  com-
panies of  armed  " boomers "  were  organized  for  the  express  purpose
of  invading  and  seizing  the  Cherokee  outlet  and  other  unoccupied
portions  of  the  Indian  territory — reserved  by  treaty  for  future  Indian
settlement — in  defiance  of  the  civil  and  military  power  of  the  Gov- ernment.
We  come  now  to  what  seems  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  Indian
autonomy.  In  1889  a  commission,  afterward  known  as  the  Cherokee
Commission,  was  appointed,  under  act  of  Congress,  to  '•negotiate with  the  Cherokee  Indians,  and  with  all  other  Indians  owning  or
claiming  lands  lying  west  of  the  ninety-sixth  degree  of  longitude  in
the  Indian  territory,  for  the  cession  to  the  United  States  of  all  their
title,  claim,  or  interest  of  every  kind  or  character  in  and  to  said
lands."     In  August  of  that  year  the  commission  made  a  proposition  to
1  Commissioner  J.  D.  C.  Atkins,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.xlv,  1886,  and  p.  lxxvii,  1887.
'i>t  L.  E.  Bennett,  in  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  93, 1S90.


CESSION    OF    CHEROKEE    STRIP— 1892  153
Chief  J.  B.  Mayes  for  the  cession  of  all  the  Cherokee  lands  thus  de-
scribed, being  that  portion  known  as  the  Cherokee  outlet  or  strip.
The  proposition  was  declined  on  the  ground  thai  the  Cherokee  con
stitution  forbade  its  consideration.1  Other  tribes  were  approached  for
a  similar  purpose,  and  the  commission  was  continued,  with  changing
personnel  from  year  to  year,  until  agreements  for  cession  and  the
taking  of  allotments  had  been  made  with  nearly  all  the  wilder  tribes
in  what  is  now  Oklahoma.
[n  the  meantime  the  Attorney -<  1-eneral  had  rendered  a  decision  deny-
ing the  right  of  Indian  tribes  to  lease  their  kind-  without  permission
of  the  Government.  At  this  time  the  Cherokee  were  deriving  an
annual  income  of  $150,000  from  the  lease  of  grazing  privileges  upon
the  strip,  hut  by  a  proclamation  of  President  Harrison  on  February
17.  1890,  ordering  the  cattlemen  to  vacate  before  the  end  of  the  year.
this  income  was  cut  oil  and  the  strip  was  rendered  practically  value-
less to  them.8  The  Cherokee  were  now  forced  to  come  to  terms,  and
a  second  proposition  for  the  cession  of  the  Cherokee  strip  was  finally
accepted  by  the  national  council  on  January  1.  1892.  "It  was  known
to  the  Cherokees  that  for  some  time  would-be  settlers  on  the  land- of
the  outlet  had  been  encamped  in  the  southern  end  of  Kansas,  and  by
every  influence  at  their  command  had  been  urging  the  Government  to
open  the  country  to  settlement  and  to  negotiate  with  the  Cherokees
afterwards,  and  that  a  bill  for  that  purpose  had  been  introduced  in
Congress."  The  consideration  was  nearly  $8,600,000,  or  about  $1.25
per  acre,  for  something  over  6,000,000  acres  of  land.  One  article  of
the  agreement  stipulates  for  ■"the  reaffirmation  to  the  Cherokee  Nation
of  the  right  of  local  self-government."8  The  agreement  having  been
ratified  by  Congress,  the  Cherokee  strip  was  opened  h\  Presidential
proclamation  on  September  16,  Is'.':;.'
The  movement  for  the  abolition  of  the  Indian  governments  and  the
allotment  and  opening  of  the  Indian  country  had  now  gained  such  force
thai  by  act  of  Congress  approved  March  3, 1893,  the  President  was
authorized  to  appoint  a  commission  of  three  -known  later  as  the
Dawes  Commission, from  its  distinguished  chairman.  Senator  Henry
L.  Dawes  of  Massachusetts  to  negotiate  with  the  five  civilized  tribes
of  Indian  territory,  viz.  the  Cherokee.  Choctaw.  Chickasaw,  Creek,
and  Seminole,  for  ■■the  extinguishment  of  tribal  titles  to  any  land-
within  that  territory,  now  held  by  any  and  all  of  such  nations  and
tribe-,  either  by  cession  of  the  same  or  some  part  thereof  to  the  Unit-
ed States,  or  by  the  allotment  and  division  of  the  same  in  severalty
among  the  Indian-  of  such  nation-  or  tribes  respectively  as  may  be
■  of  Indian  <  knnmissioni  r,  p,  22,  1889 ion  by  President  Harrison  and  order  from  Indian  C   missi   n  in  deport  of  Indian
Commissioner,  pp.  lxxii-lxxiii,  i-ji   122,  1890      rhi   tease  figures  are  from  personal  information.
■  rT.  J.  Morgan,  Report  of  Indian  C   aissioner,  pp,  79  80,  1892.
'Commissioner  I).  M.  Browning,  Report  of  Indian  Commissionei    pp


154  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.
entitled  to  the  same,  or  by  such  other  method  as  may  be  agreed  upon
.  .  .  to  enable  the  ultimate  creation  of  a  state  or  states  of  the
Union,  which  shall  embrace  the  land  within  the  said  Indian  territory."1 The  commission  appointed  arrived  in  the  Indian  territory  in  January,
1894,  and  at  once  began  negotiations.2
At  this  time  the  noncitizen  element  in  Indian  Territory  was  officially
reported  to  number  at  least  200,000  souls,  while  those  having  rights
as  citizens  of  the  five  civilized  tribes,  including  full-blood  and  mixed-
blood  Indians,  adopted  whites,  and  negroes,  numbered  but  70, 500. s
Not  all  of  the  noncitizens  were  intruders,  many  being  there  by  per-
mission of  the  Indian  governments  or  on  official  or  other  legitimate
business,  but  the  great  body  of  them  were  illegal  squatters  or  unrecog-
nized claimants  to  Indian  rights,  against  whose  presence  the  Indians
themselves  had  never  ceased  to  protest.  A  test  case  brought  this  year
in  the  ( 'herokee  Nation  was  decided  by  the  Interior  Department  against
the  claimants  and  in  favor  of  the  Cherokee.  Commenting  upon  threats
made  in  consequence  by  the  rejected  claimants,  the  agent  for  the  five
tribes  remarks:  "It  is  not  probable  that  Congress  will  establish  a
court  to  nullify  and  vacate  a  formal  decision  of  the  Interior  Depart-
ment."4 A  year  later  he  says  of  these  intruders  that  "so  long  as  they
have  a  foothold — a  residence,  legal  or  not — in  the  Indian  country  they
will  be  disturbers  of  peace  and  promoters  of  discord,  and  while  they
cry  aloud,  and  spare  not,  for  allotment  and  statehood,  they  arc  but
stumbling  blocks  and  obstacles  to  that  mutual  good  will  and  fraternal
feeling  which  must  be  cultivated  and  secured  before  allotment  is  prac-
ticable and  statehood  desirable."'  The  removal  of  the  intruders  was
still  delayed,  and  in  1896  the  decision  of  citizenship  claims  was  taken
from  the  Indian  government  and  relegated  to  the  Dawes  Commission.6
In  1895  the  commission  was  increased  to  rive  members,  with  enlarged
jiowers.  In  the  meantime  a  survey  of  Indian  Territory  had  been
ordered  and  begun.  In  September  the  agent  wrote:  "The  Indians
now  know  that  a  survey  of  their  lands  is  being  made,  and  whether
with  or  without  their  consent,  the  survey  is  going  on.  The  meaning
of  such  survey  is  too  plain  to  be  disregarded,  and  it  is  justly  con-
sidered as  the  initial  step,  solemn  and  authoritative,  toward  the  oxer-
throw  of  their  present  communal  holdings.  At  this  writing  surveying
corps  are  at  work  in  the  Creek.  Choctaw,  and  Chickasaw  Nation-,  and
therefore  each  one  of  these  tribes  has  an  ocular  demonstration  of  the
actual  intent  and  ultimate  purpose  of  the  government  of  the  United
States."  :
1  Quotation  from  act.  etc..  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  lor  lsil-l,  p.  J7,  ls'.i.Y
2  Report  of  Agent  D.M.  Wisdom,  ibid.,  p.  Ml.
sibid.,  and  statistical  table,  p.  570.
'  Report  '■!  Agent  D.  M.  Wisdom,  ibid.,  p.  1 15.
5 Agent  I>.  M.  Wisdom,  in  Report  Indian  Commissioner  for  1S95,  p.  155,  1896.
1  Commissioner  I'.  M.  Browning,  Report  <>i  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  si.  1896.
;  Report  of  Agent  I).  M.  Wisdom.  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  for  1895,  pp.  159,160.1896.


!   by]  i  1 1\  DITIOH    in    1895  1  55
The  genera]  prosperity  and  advancement  of  the  Chei"okee  Nation  at
this  time  may  be  judged  from  the  report  of  the  secretary  of  the  <  !her-
okee  national  board  of  education  to  |A.gen1  Wisdom.  He  reports  1,800
children  attending  two  seminaries,  male  and  female,  two  high  schools,
and  one  hundred  primary  schools,  teachers  being  paid  from  |35  to
$100  per  month  for  nine  months  in  the  year.  Fourteen  primary
schools  were  for  the  use  of  the  negro  citizens  of  the  Nation,  besides
which  they  had  a  fine  high  school,  kept  up,  like  all  the  others,  at  the
expense  of  the  Cherokee  goverment.  Besides  the  national  schools
there  were  twelve  mission  schools  helping  to  do  splendid  work  for
children  of  both  citizens  and  noncitizens.  Children  of  noncitizens
were  not  allowed  to  attend  the  Cherokee  national  schools,  but  had
their  o\\  n  subscription  schools.  The  orphan  asylum  ranked  as  a  high
school,  in  which  L50  orphans  were  hoarded  and  educated,  \\  ith  gradu-
ates every  year.  It  was  a  large  brick  building  of  three  stories.  80  by
240  feet.  The  male  seminary,  accommodating  200  pupils,  and  the
female  seminary,  accommodating  225  pupils,  were  also  large  brick
structures,  three  stories  in  height  and  L50  by  240  feet  on  the  ground.
Three  members,  all  Cherokee  by  blood,  constituted  a  board  of  educa-
tion.    The  secretary  adds  that  the  Cherokee  are  proud  of  their  scl   Is
and  educational  institutions,  and  that  no  other  country  under  the  sun
is  so  Messed  with  etlucat ional  advantages  at  large.1
At  this  time  the  Cherokee  Nation  numbered  something  over  25,000
Indian,  white,  and  negro  citizens;  the  total  citizen  population  of  the
three  races  in  the  five  civilized  tribes  numbered  about  70,000,  while
the  noncitizens  had  increased  to  250,000  and  their  number  was  being
rapidly  augmented.2  Realizing  that  the  swift,  inevitable  end  must  be
the  destruction  of  their  national  governments,  the  Cherokee  began
once  more  to  consider  the  question  of  removal  from  the  United  States.
Thescheme  is  outlined  in  a  letter  written  by  a  brother  of  the  principal
chief  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  under  date  of  May  31.  1895,  from  which
we  quote.
After  prefacing  that  the  government  of  the  United  State-  seems
determined  to  break  up  the  tribal  autonomy  of  the  five  civilized
tribes  and  to  divide  their  lands,  thus  bringing  about  conditions
under  which  the  Cherokee  could  not  exist,  he  continues:
Then  for  a  remedy  that  will  lead  us  nut  of  it,  away  from  it.  and  one  that  pr   isea
niir  preservation  as  a  distinct  race  of  people  in  the  enjoyment  of  customs,  social  ami
political,  that  have  been  handed  down  to  us  from  remote  generations  of  the  past.
My  plan  is  for  the-  Cherokees  to  sell  their  entire  landed  possessions  to  the  United
^tatcs.  divide  the  proceeds  thereof  per  capita,  then  such  as  desire  to  do  so  unit.'  in
ili.'  formation  of  an  Indian  colony,  and  with  their  funds  jointly  purchase  in    Mexico
iLetterol    \    r .   :  of  the  Board  of  Education,  in  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  for
1895,  p.  I'll.  1896.     I  he  authoi  can  add  personal  testimony  as  to  tin   npletenesa  <>!  tbi
establishment
=  Report  of  Agent  Wisdom,  ibid.,  p.  162.


156  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
<>r  Smith  America  a  body  of  land  sufficient  for  all  their  purposes;  to  be  forever  their
joint  home.  ...  I  believe  also  that  for  such  fndians  as  did  not  desire  to  join
the  colony  and  leave  the  country  provision  should  be  made  for  them  to  repurchase
their  old  homes,  or  such  <  it  her  lands  in  the  country  here  as  they  might  desire,  and
they  could  remain  here  and  meet  such  fate  as  awaits  them.  I  believe  this  presents  '
the  mi  i-t  feasible  and  equitable  solution  of  the  questions  that  we  must  decide  in  the
near  future,  and  will  prove  absolutely  just  and  fair  to  all  classes  and  conditions  of
our  citizens.  1  also  believe  thai  the  same  could  be  acted  upon  by  any  or  all  of  the
five  civilized  tribes.     .     .     . l
The  final  chapter  is  nearly  written.  I5y  successive  enactments
within  the  last  ten  years  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Indian  courts  has
been  steadily  narrowed  and  the  authority  of  the  Federal  courts  pro-
portionately extended;  the  right  to  determine  Indian  citizenship  has
been  taken  from  the  Indians  and  vested  in  a  Government  commission;
the  lands  of  the  five  tribes  have  been  surveyed  and  seetionized  by
Government  surveyors:  and  by  the  sweeping  provisions  of  the  Curtis
act  of  June  28,  L898,  "for  the  protection  of  the  people  of  the  Indian
Territory."  the  entire  control  of  tribal  revenues  is  taken  from  the  five Indian  tribes  and  vested  with  a  resident  supervising  inspector,  the
tribal  courts  are  abolished,  allotments  are  made  compulsory,  and
authority  is  given  to  incorporate  white  men's  towns  in  the  Indian
tribes.8  By  this  act  the  five  civilized  tribes  are  reduced  to  the
condition  of  ordinary  reservation  tribes  under  government  agents
with  white  communities  planted  in  their  midst.  In  the  meantime  the
Dawes  commission,  continued  up  to  the  present,  has  by  unremitting
effort  broken  down  the  opposition  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw,
who  have  consented  to  allotment,  while  the  Creeks  and  the  Seminole
are  now  wavering.3  The  Cherokee  still  hold  out,  the  Ketoowah  secret
society  (47)  especially  being  strong  in  its  resistance,  and  when  the  end
conies  it  is  possible  that  the  protest  will  take  shape  in  a  wholesale
emigration  to  Mexico.  Late  in  1897  the  agent  for  the  live  tribes
reports  that  "there  seems  a  determined  purpose  on  the  part  of  many
fullbloods  ...  to  emigrate  to  either  Mexico  or  South  America
and  there  purchase  new  homes  for  themselves  and  families.  Such
individual  action  may  grow  to  the  proportion  of  a  colony,  and  it  is
understood  that  liberal  grants  of  land  can  be  secured  from  the  coun-
tries mentioned.'  Mexican  agents  are  now  (1901)  among  the  Cherokee
advocating  the  scheme,  which  may  develop  to  include  a  large  propor-
tion of  the  five  civilized  tribes.6
By  the  census  of  1898,  the  most  recent  taken,  as  reported  by  Agent
1  Letter  oi  Bird  Harris,  May  31,  1895,  in  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  fur  189ft,  p.  160.  1896.
^Synopsis  of  Curtis  act,  pp.  T.v-vn.  and  Curtis  act  in  full,  p.  425  et  seq.,  in  Report  of  Indian  Commis-
sioner tor  1898;  noted  also  in  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  84  et  seq.,  1899.
1  Commissioner  W.  A.  Jones,  ibid.,  pp.  i,  84  et  seq.  (Curtis  act  and  Dawes  commission).
1  Report  of  Agent  I».  M.  Wisdom,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  141-144,  1*97
6  Author's  personal  information:  see  also  House  bill  No.  1165  "  for  the  relief  of  certain  Indians  in
Indian  Territory,"  etc.,  Fifty-sixth  Congress,  first  session.  l'.HHi.


i   nei  ('    I'SAI.A    AND    < HAKLEY  L57
Wisdom,  the  Cherokee  Nation  numbered  34,46]   persons,  as  follows:
Cherokee  by  blood  (including  all  degrees  of  admixture),  26,£   :  inter
married  whites,  2,300;  negro  Ereedmen,  1,000;  Delaware,  871;  >ha«
nee,  7: mi.  The  total  acreage  of  the  Nation  was  5,031,351  acres,  which,
if  divided  per  capita  under  the  provisions  of  the  Curtis  bill,  after
deducting  60,000  acres  reserved  for  town-site  and  other  purposes,
would  give  to  each  Cherokee  citizen  111  acres.1  It  tnusl  be  noted
that  the  official  rolls  include  a  large  number  of  persons  whose  claims
are  disputed   by   the  Cherokee  authorities.
nil:    EASTERN    BAND
It  remains  to  speak  of  the  eastern  hand  of  Cherokee  -the  remnant
which  still  dines  to  the  woods  and  waters  of  the  old  home  country.
As  has  been  said,  a  considerable  number  had  eluded  the  troop--  in  the
general  round-up  of  1838  and  had  tied  to  the  fastnesses  of  the  high
mountains.  Here  they  were  joined  by  others  who  had  managed  to
break  through  the  guard  at  Calhoun  and  other  collecting  stations,  until
the  whole  number  of  fugitives  in  hiding  amounted  to  a  thousand  or
more,  principally  of  the  mountain  Cherokee  of  North  Carolina,  the
purest-blooded  and  mosl  conservative  of  the  Nation.  About  one-half
the  refugee  warriors  had  put  themselves  under  command  of  a  noted
Leader  named  U'tsala,  '"Lichen."'  who  made  his  headquarters  amid  the
lofty  peaks  at  the  head  of  Oconaluftee,  from  which  secure  hiding
place,  although  reduced  to  extremity  of  suffering  from  starvation  and
exposure,  they  defied  every  effort  to  effect  their  capture.
The  work  of  running  down  these  fugitives  proved  to  be  so  difficult
an  undertaking  and  so  well-nigh  barren, of  result  that  when  Charley
and  his  sons  made  their  bold  stroke  for  freedom5  General  Scott  eagerly
seized  the  incident  as  an  opportunity  for  compromise.  To  this  end  he
engaged  the  services  of  William  11.  Thomas,  a  trader  who  for  more
than  twenty  years  had  been  closely  identified  with  the  mountain  Cher-
okee and  possessed  their  full  confidence,  and  authorized  him  to  submit
to  U'tsala  a  proposition  that  if  the  latter  would  seize  Charley  and  the
others  who  had  been  concerned  in  the  attack  upon  the  soldiers  and
surrender  them  for  punishment,  the  pursuit  would  be  called  off  and
the  fugitives  allowed  to  stay  unmolested  until  an  effort  could  be  made
to  secure  permission  from  the  general  government  for  them  to  remain.
Thomas  accepted  the  commission,  and  taking  with  him  one  or  two
Indian-  made  his  way  over  secret  paths  to  U'tsala's  hiding  place.  He
presented  Scott's  proposition  and  represented  to  the  chief  that  by
aiding  in  bringing  Charley's  party  to  punishment  according  to  the rule-  of  war  he  could  secure  respite  tor  his  sorely  pressed  followers,
with  the  ultimate  hope  that  they  might  he  allowed  to  remain  in  their
1  Report  of  Agent  I).  M.  Wisdom,  Report  "i  [ndian  Commissioner,  p.  159,  189S.
ge  131.


158  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
own  country,  whereas  if  he  rejected  the  offer  the  whole  force  of  the
seven  thousand  troops  which  hud  now  completed  the  work  of  gather-
ing up  and  deporting  the  rest  of  the  tribe  would  be  set  loose  upon  his
own    small    hand    until    the   last  refugee   had    been   either   taken   or
killed.
U'tsala  turned  the  proposition  in  his  mind  long  and  seriously.  His
heart  was  hitter,  for  his  wife  and  little  son  had  starved  to  death  on  the
mountain  side,  but  he  thought  of  the  thousands  who  were  already  on
their  Long  march  into  exile  and  then  he  looked  round  upon  his  little
band  of  followers.  If  only  they  might  stay,  even  though  a  few  must
lie  sacrificed,  it  was  better  than  that  all  should  die — for  they  had  sworn
never  to  leave  their  country.  He  consented  and  Thomas  returned  to
report  to  General  Scott.
Now  occurred  a  remarkable  incident  which  shows  the  character  of
Thomas  and  the  masterly  influence  which  he  already  had  over  the
Indians,  although  as  yet  he  was  hardly  more  than  thirty  years  old.  It
was  known  that  Charley  and  his  party  were  in  hiding  in  a  cave  of  the
Great  Smokies,  at  the  head  of  Deep  creek,  but  it  was  not  thought
likely  that  he  could  be  taken  without  hloodshed  and  a  further  delay
which  might  prejudice  the  whole  undertaking.  Thomas  determined  to
go  to  him  and  try  to  persuade  him  to  come  in  and  surrender.  Declin-
ing Scott's  otter  of  an  escort,  he  went  alone  to  the  cave,  and,  getting between  the  Indians  and  their  guns  as  they  were  sitting  around  the
tire  near  the  entrance,  he  walked  up  to  Charley  and  announced  his
message.  The  old  man  listened  in  silence  and  then  said  simply,  "I
will  come  in.  I  don't  want  to  be  hunted  down  by  my  own  people."
They  came  in  voluntarily  and  were  shot,  as  has  been  already  narrated,
one  only,  a  mere  boy,  being  spared  on  account  of  his  youth.  This
boy,  now  an  old  man,  is  still  living.  Wasitu'na,  better  known  to  the
whites  as  Washington.1
A  respite  having  thus  been  obtained  for  the  fugitives,  Thomas  next
went  to  Washington  to  endeavor  to  make  some  arrangement  for  their
permanent  settlement.  Under  the  treaty  of  New  Echota,  in  1835,  the
Cherokee  were  entitled,  besides  the  lump  sum  of  five  million  dollars
for  the  lands  ceded,  to  an  additional  compensation  for  the  improve-
ments which  they  were  forced  to  abandon  and  for  spoliations  by  white
citizens,  together  with  a  per  capita  allowance  to  cover  the  cost  of
removal  and  subsistence  for  one  year  in  the  new  country.  The  twelfth
article  had  also  provided  that  such  Indians  as  chose  to  remain  in  the
East  and  become  citizens  there  might  do  so  under  certain  conditions.
i  Charley's  story  as  here  given  is  from  the  author's  personal  information,  derived  chiefly  from  con-
versations with  Colonel  Thomas  and  with  Wasitu'na  and  other  old  Indians.  An  ornate  but  some
u  hat  inaccurate  account  is  given  also  in  Lanman's  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  written  on
the  ground  ten  years  after  the  events  deseribed.  The  leading  lactsare  noted  in  General  Scott's  official dispatches.


PURCHASE    OF    Ql   AM. A    KI--I  IM   \TI<>.\-      1842  L59
cadi  head  of  a  family  thus  remaining  to  be  confirmed  in  a  preemption
right  i"  L60  acres.  In  consequence  of  the  settled  purpose  of  President
Jackson  to  deport  e\  cry  Indian,  this  permission  was  canceled  and  sup
plementary  articles  substituted  by  which  some  additional  compensation
was  allowed  in  lieu  of  the  promised  preemptions  and  all  individual
reservations  granted  under  previous  treaties.1  Every  Cherokee  was
thus  made  a  landless  alien  in  his  original  country.
The  last  party  of  emigrant  Cherokee  had  started  for  the  West  in
December,  L838.  Nine  months  afterwards  the  refugees  still  scattered
about  in  the  mountains  of  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee  were  reported
to  number  L,046.!  By  persistent  effort  at  Washington  from  L836  to
L842,  including  one  continuous  stay  of  three  years  at  the  capital  city,
Thomas  finally  obtained  governmental  permission  for  these  to  remain,
and  their  share  of  the  moneys  due  for  improvements  and  reservations
confiscated  was  placed  at  his  disposal,  as  their  agent  and  trustee,  for  the
purpose  of  buying  lands  upon  which  they  could  be  permanently  settled.
Under  this  authority  he  bought  for  them,  at  various  times  up  to  the
year  L861,  a  number  of  contiguous  tracts  of  land  upon  Oconaluftee
river  and  Soco  creek,  within  the  present  Swain  and  Jackson  counties
of  North  Carolina,  together  with  several  detached  tracts  in  the  more
western  counties  of  the  same  state.  The  main  body,  upon  the  waters
of  Oconaluftee, which  was  chiefly  within  the  limits  of  the  cession  of
L819,  came  afterward  to  he  known  as  the  Qualla  boundary,  or  Qualla
reservation,  taking  the  name  from  Thomas'  principal  trading  store and  agency  headquarters.  The  detached  western  tracts  were  within
the  final  cession  of  1835,  hut  all  alike  were  bought  by  Thomas  from
\\  hite  owners.  As  North  ( Jarolina  refused  to  recognize  Indians  a-  land-
owners within  the  state,  and  persisted  in  this  refusal  until  L866,3
Thomas,  as  their  authorized  agent  under  the  Government,  held  the
deeds  in  his  own  name.  Before  it  was  legally  possible  under  the  state
laws  to  transfer  the  title  to  the  Indians,  his  own  affairs  had  become
involved  and  his  health  impaired  by  age  and  the  hardships  of  military
service  so  that  his  mind  gave  way.  thus  leaving  the  whole  question  of
the  Indian  title  a  subject  of  litigation  until  its  adjudication  by  the
United  States  in  1875,  supplemented  by  further  decisions  in  1894.
To  Colonel  William  Holland  Thomas  the  East  Cherokee  of  to-day
owe  their  existence  as  a  people, and  for  half  a  century  he  was  as  inti-
mately connected  with  their  history  as  was  John  Ross  with  that  of  the
main  Cherokee  Nation.  Singularly  enough,  their  connection  with
Cherokee  affairs  extended  o\-er  nearly  the  same  period,  hut  while
Ross  participated  in  their  national  matters  Thomas  cave  his  effort  to
■    Bchota  u<'. ii      :•  !  supplementary  articles,  March  I.  1836,  in  Indian
Treaties   pp.  I  ilso  full  discussion  of  sami  treat)  in  i:    Sation,  Fifth  Ann.
Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1888.
op  -II  ,p.292  I  ibid.,p.31  i


160  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.asn.19
\
a  neglected  bund  hardly  known  in  the  councils  of  the  tribe.  In  his
many-sided  capacity  he  strikingly  resembles  another  white  man  promi-
nent in  Cherokee  history,  General  Sam  Houston.
Thomas  was  born  in  the  year  1805  on  Raccoon  creek,  about  two  miles
from  Waynesville  in  North  Carolina.  His  father,  who  was  related  to
President  Zachary  Taylor,  came  of  a  Welsh  family  which  had  immi-
grated to  Virginia  at  an  early  period,  while  on  his  mother's  side  he was  descended  from  a  Maryland  family  of  Revolutionary  stock.  He
was  an  only  and  posthumous  child,  his  father  having  been  accidentally
drowned  a  short  time  before  the  boy  was  born.  Being  unusually
bright  for  his  age,  he  was  engaged  when  only  twelve  years  old  to
tend  an  Indian  trading  store  on  Soco  creek,  in  the  present  Jackson
county,  owned  by  Felix  Walker,  son  of  the  Congressman  of  the  same
name  who  made  a  national  reputation  by  "talking  for  Buncombe." The  store  was  on  the  south  side  of  the  creek,  about  a  mile  above  the
now  abandoned  Macedonia  mission,  within  the  present  reservation,  and
was  a  branch  of  a  larger  establishment  which  Walker  himself  kept  at
Waynesville.  The  trade  was  chiefly  in  skins  and  ginseng,  or  "sang,"
the  latter  for  shipment  to  China,  where  it  was  said  to  be  worth  its
weight  in  silver.  This  trade  was  very  pi'ofitable.  as  the  price  to  the
Indians  was  but  ten  cents  per  pound  in  merchandise  for  the  green  root,
whereas  it  now  brings  seventy-five  cents  in  cash  upon  the  reservation,
the  supply  steadily  diminishing  with  every  year.  The  contract  was
for  three  years'  service  for  a  total  compensation  of  one.  hundred  dollars and  expenses,  but  Walker  devoted  so  much  of  his  attention  to  law
studies  that  the  Waynesville  store  was  finally  closed  for  debt,  and  at
the  end  of  his  contract  term  young  Thomas  was  obliged  to  accept  a
lot  of  second-hand  law  books  in  lieu  of  other  payment.  How  well  he
made  use  of  them  is  evident  from  his  subsequent  service  in  the  state
senate  and  in  other  official  capacities.  *
Soon  after  entering  upon  his  duties  he  attracted  the  notice  of  Yon-
aguska.  or  Drowning-bear  (Ya'na-giin'ski,  "Bear-drowning-him"),  the
acknowledged  chief  of  all  the,  Cherokee  then  living  on  the  waters  of
Tin  kasegee  and  Oconaluftee — the  old  Kituhwa  country.  On  learning
that  the  boy  had  neither  father  nor  brother,  the  old  chief  formally
adopted  him  as  his  son.  and  as  such  he  was  thenceforth  recognized  in
the  tribe  under  the  name  of  Wil-Usdi',  or  "Little  Will."  he  being  of
small  stature  even  in  mature  age.  From  his  Indian  friends,  particu-
larly a  boy  of  the  same  age  who  was  his  companion  in' the  -tore,  he learned  the  language  as  well  as  a  white  man  has  ever  learned  it.  so  that
in  his  dec  lining  years  it  dwelt  in  memory  more  strongly  than  his
mother  tongue.  After  the  invention  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet,  he
learned  also  to  read  and  write  the  language,,
In  L819  the  lands  on  Tuckasegee  and  its  branches  were  sold   by  the


BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY  NINETEENTH    ANNUAL    REPORT      PL.    IX
COL.   W.    H.   THOMAS      WIL-USDI'i
Ft    photogra   1  1858  kindly  loaned  by  Capt.  James  \v.  Terrell)




WILLIAM     II.    THOMAS  L61
Indian-,  and  Thomas's  mother  soon  after  removed  from  Waj  nes^  ille  to
a  farm  which  she  purchased  on  the  west  bank  of  Oconaluf  tee,  opposite
the  month  of  Soco,  where  her  son  went  to  live  with  her,  having  now
--ft  up  in  business  lor  himself  at  Qualla.  Ybnaguska  and  his  immedi-
ate connection  continued  to  reside  on  a  -mall  reservation  in  the  same
neighborhood,  while  the  rest  of  the  Cherokee  retired  to  the  west  of
the  Nantahala  mountains,  though  still  visiting  and  trading  on  Soco.
After  several  shiftings  Thomas  finally,  soon  after  the  removal  in  ls".s.
bought  a  farm  on  the  northern  hank  of  Tuckasegee,  just  above  the
present  town  of  Whittier  in  Swain  county,  and  built  there  a  home-
stead which  he  called  Stekoa,  after  an  Indian  town  destroyed  by
Rutherford  which  had  occupied  the  same  site.  At  the  time  of  the
removal  he  was  the  proprietor  of  five  trading  stores  in  or  adjoining  the
Cherokee  country,  viz.  at  Qualla  town,  near  the  mouth  of  Soco  creek;
on  Scott's  creek,  near  Webster;  on  Cheowa,  near  the  present  Robbins
ville;  at  the  junction  of  Valley  river  and  Hiwassee,  now  Murphy;  and
at  the  Cherokee  agency  at  Calhoun  (now  Charleston).  Tennessee.
Besides  carrying  on  a  successful  trading  business  he  was  also  studying
law  and  taking  an  active  interest  in  local  politics.
In  his  capacity  as  agent  for  the  eastern  Cherokee  he  laid  off  the.
lands  purchased  for  them  into  five  districts  or  "towns,"  which  he
named  Bird  town.  Paint  town.  Wolf  town,  Yellow  hill,  and  Big  cove,
the  name-  which  they  -till  retain,  the  first  three  beingthose  of  Chero-
kee clans.1  He  also  drew  up  for  them  a  simple  form  of  government,
the  execution  of  which  was  in  his  own  and  Ybnaguska's  hands  until  the death  of  the  latter,  after  which  the  hand  knew  no  other  chief  than
Thomas  until  his  retirement  from  active  life.  In  1848  he  was  elected
to  the  state  senate  and  continued  to  serve  in  that  capacity  until  the
outbreak  of  the  civil  war.  As  state  senator  he  inaugurated  a  system  of
road  improvements  for  western  North  Carolina  and  was  also  the  father
of  the  Western  North  Carolina  Railroad  (now  a  part  of  the  Southern
-\  stem),  originally  projected  to  develop  the  copper  mines  of  Ducktown,
Tennessee.
With  his  colleagues  in  the  state  senate  he  voted  for  secession  in  1861,
and  at  once  resigned  to  recruit  troops  for  the  Confederacy,  to  which,
until  the  close  of  the  war.  he  gave  his  whole  time,  thought,  and  effort.
In  1862  he  organized  the  Thomas  Legion,  consisting  of  two  regiments
of  infantry,  a  battalion  of  cavalry,  a  company  of  engineers,  and  a  field
battery,  he  himself  commanding  as  colonel,  although  then  nearly  sixty
years  of  age.  Four  companies  were  made  up  principally  of  his  own
Cherokee.     The  Thomas   Legion  operated  chiefly  as  a  frontier  guard
i  In  the  Cherokee  language  rsiskwa'hl,  --Bird  place,"  Ani'-Wa'dihl,  "Paint  place,     (Va'ya'hl,  "Wolf
place,"  E'lawa'di,  "Red  earth"  (now  Cherokee  post-office  and  tanufi'yl    "Raven
place."    There  was  also,  for  a  tune,  a  "  Pretty-woman  town"    Ani'-Gila'hl?).
19    KTH— Ul   11


162  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ans.19
for  the  Confederacy  along  the  mountain  region  southward  from  Cum-
berland  gap.
After  tlic  close  of  the  conflict  he  returned  to  his  home  at  Stekoa  and
again  took  charge,  unofficially,  of  the  affairs  of  the  Cherokee,  whom
lie  attended  during  the  smallpox  epidemic  of  1866  and  assisted  through
the  unsettled  conditions  of  the  reconstruction  period.  His  own
resources  had  been  swept  away  by  the  war.  and  all  his  hopes  had  gone
down  with  the  lost  cause.  This,  added  to  the  effects  of  three  years  of
hardship  and  anxiety  in  the  field  when  already  almost  past  the  age
limit,  soon  after  brought  about  a  physical  and  mental  eollapse,  from
which  lie  never  afterward  rallied  except  at  intervals,  when  for  a  short
time  the  old  spirit  would  Hash  out  in  all  its  brightness.  He  died  in
1893  at  the  advanced  age  of  nearly  ninety,  retaining  to  the  last  the
courteous  manner  of  a  gentleman  by  nature  and  training,  with  an
exact  memory  and  the  clear-cut  statement  of  a  lawyer  and  man  of
affairs.  To  his  work  in  the  state  senate  the  people  of  western  North
Carolina  owe  more  than  to  that  of  any  other  man,  while  among  the
older  Cherokee  the  name  of  Wil-Csdi'  is  still  revered  as  that  of  a
father  and  a  great  chief.1
Yonaguska.  properly  Ya'iui-giifi'ski,  the  adopted  father  of  Thomas, is  the  most  prominent  chief  in  the  history  of  the  East  Cherokee,
although,  singularly  enough,  his  name  does  not  occur  in  connection
with  any  of  the  early  wars  or  treaties.  This  is  due  partly  to  the  fact
that  he  was  a  peace  chief  and  counselor  rather  than  a  war  leader,  and
in  part  to  the  fact  that  the  isolated  position  of  the  mountain  Cherokee
kept  them  aloof  in  a  gnat  measure  from  the  tribal  councils  of  those
living  to  the  west  anil  south.  In  person  he  was  strikingly  handsome,
being  six  feet  three  inches  in  height  and  strongly  built,  with  a  faint
tinge  of  red.  due  to  a  slight  strain  of  white  blood  on  his  father's  side. relieving  the  brown  of  his  cheek.  In  power  of  oratory  he  is  said  to
have  surpassed  any  other  chief  of  his  day.  When  the  Cherokee  lands
on  Tuckasegee  were  sold  by  the  treaty  of  1819,  Yonaguska  continued
to  reside  on  a  reservation  of  640  acres  in  a  bend  of  the  river  a  short  dis-
tance above  the  present  Bryson  City,  on  the  site  of  the  ancient
Kituhwa.  1  le  afterward  moved  over  to  Oconaluftee,  and  finally,  after
the  Removal,  gathered  his  people  about  him  and  settled  with  them  on
Soco  creek  on  lands  purchased  for  them  by  Thomas.
'The  fact?  concerning  Colonel  Thorna-- '*  <  :nvi  t  uiv  .1' -rived  chiefly  from  the  author's  conversations
with  Thomas  himself,  supplemented  by  information  from  his  former  assistant,  Capt.  James  W.
Terrell,  and  others  who  knew  him.  together  with  an  admirable  sketch  in  the  North  Carolina  Univer-
sity Magazine  for  May  1899,  by  Mrs.  A.  c.  Avery,  his  daughter.  He  is  also  frequently  noticed,  in  con-
nection with  East  Cherokee  matters,  in  the  annual  reports  of  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs;  in
the  North  Carolina  Confederate  Roster;  in  Lanman's  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains;  and  in
Zeiglerand  Grosscup's  Heart  of  the  Alleghanies,  etc.  Some  manuscript  contributions  to  the  library
of  the  Georgia  Historical  Society  in  Savannah— now  unfortunately  mislaid— show  his  interest  in
Cherokee  linguistics.


>   sey]  YONAGUSKA  L63
Ilr  was  a  prophel  and  reformer  as  well  a~  a  chief.  When  about
sixty  years  of  age  be  had  a  severe  sickness,  terminating  in  a  trance,
dui'ing  which  his  people  mourned  him  as  dead.  At  the  end  of  twent}
four  hours,  however,  he  awoke  to  consciousness  and  announced  thai  he
hail  been  to  the  spirit  world,  where  he  had  talked  with  friends  who
had  gone  before,  and  with  God,  who  had  sent  him  hark  witli  a  message
to  the  Indians,  promising  to  call  him  again  at  a  later  time.  From
that  day  until  his  death  his  words  were  Listened  to  as  those  of  our
inspired.  He  had  been  somewhat  addicted  to  liquor,  but  now.  on  the
recommendation  of  Thomas,  not  only  quit  drinking  himself.  hut  organ
ized  his  tribe  into  a  temperance  society.  To  accomplish  this  he  called
his  people  together  in  council,  and.  after  clearly  pointing  out  to  them
the  serious  effect  of  intemperance,  in  an  eloquent  speech  that  moved
some  of  his  audience  to  tears,  he  declared  that  God  had  permitted  him
to  return  to  earth  especially  that  he  might  thus  warn  his  people  and
banish  whisky  from  among  them.  He  then  had  Thomas  write  out  a
pledge,  which  was  signed  first  by  the  chief  and  then  by  each  one  of  the
council,  and  from  that  time  until  after  his  death  whisky  was  unknown
among  the  East  Cherokee.
Although  frequent  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  to  induce  him  and
bis  people  to  remove  to  the  West,  he  firmly  resisted  every  persuasion,
declaring  that  the  Indians  were  safer  from  aggression  among  their
locks  and  mountains  than  they  could  ever  be  in  a  land  which  the  while
man  could  find  profitable,  and  that  the  Cherokee  could  he  happy  only
in  the  country  w  here  nature  had  planted  him.  While  counseling  peace
and  friendship  with  the  white  man,  he  held  always  to  his  Indian  faith
and  was  extremely  suspicious  of  missionaries.  On  one  occasion,  after
the  first  Bible  translation  into  the  Cherokee  language  and  alphabet,
some  one  brought  a  copy  of  Matthew  from  New  Echota,  hut  Yona-
guska  would  not  allow  it  to  he  read  to  his  people  until  it  had  first  been
read  to  himself.  After  listening  to  one  or  two  chapters  the  old  chief
dryly  remarked:  "Well,  it  seems  to  be  a  good  book — strange  that  the
white  people  are  not  better,  after  having  had  it  so  long."
He  died,  aged  about  eighty,  in  April.  1839,  within  a  year  after  the
Removal.  Shortly  before  the  end  he  had  himself  carried  into  the
townhouse  on  Soeo.  of  which  he  had  supervised  the  building,  where,
extended  on  a  couch,  he  made  a  last  talk  to  his  people,  commend-
ing Thomas  to  them  as  their  chief  and  again  warning  them  earnestly
against  ever  leaving  their  own  country.  Then  wrapping  his  blanket
around  him.  he  quietly  lay  hack  and  died.  He  was  buried  beside
Soco.  about  a  mile  below  the  old  Macedonia  mission,  with  a  rude
mound  of  stones  to  mark  the  spot.  He  left  two  wives  and  consid-
erable property,  including  an  old  negro  slave  named  Cudjo,  who  was
devotedly  attached  to  him.     One  of  his  daughters.  Kata'Ista.  still  sur-


104  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
vives,  and  is  the  last  conservator  of  the  potter's  art  among  the  East
Cherokee.1
Yonaguska  had  succeeded  in  authority  to  Yane'gwa,  "Big-bear,"
w  ho  appears  to  have  been  of  considerable  local  prominence  in  his  time,
but  wlio.se  name,  even  with  the  oldest  of  the  band,  is  now  but  a  mem-
ory. He  was  among  the  signers  of  the  treaties  of  1798  and  1805,  and
by  the  treaty  of  L819  was  confirmed  in  a  reservation  of  640  acres  as
one  of  those  living  within  the  ceded  territory  who  were  "believed  to
be  persons  of  industry  and  callable  of  managing  their  property  with
discretion,"  and  who  had  made  considerable  improvements  on  the
tracts  reserved.  This  reservation,  still  known  as  the  Big-bear  farm,
was  on  the  western  bank  of  Oconaluftee,  a  few  miles  above  its  mouth,
and  appears  to  have  been  the  same  afterward  occupied  by  Yonaguska.2
Another  of  the  old  notables  among  the  East  Cherokee  was  Tsunu'la-
hufi'ski,  corrupted  by  the  whites  to  Junaluska,  a  great  wTarrior,  from
whom  the  ridge  west  of  YVayncsville  takes  its  name.  In  early  life  he
was  known  as  (Ifir'kala'skiV1  On  the  outbreak  of  the  Creek  war
in  1813  he  raised  a  party  of  warriors  to  go  down,  as  he  boasted,  "to
exterminate  the  Creeks.'"  Not  meeting  with  complete  success,  he announced  the  result,  according  to  the  Cherokee  custom,  at  the  next
dance  after  his  return  in  a  single  word,  (htxiiiu'lilhilngiji',  "I  tried,  but
could  not,"  given  out  as  a  cue  to  the  song  leader,  who  at  once  took  it
as  the  burden  of  his  song.  Thenceforth  the  disappointed  warrior  was
known  as  Tsunu'lahufi'ski,  "'One  who  tries,  but  fails."  He  distinguished
himself  at  the  Horseshoe  bend,  where  the  action  of  the  Cherokee
decided  the  battle  in  favor  of  Jackson's  army,  and  was  often  heard  to
say  after  the  removal:  "If  I  had  known  that  Jackson  would  drive  us
from  our  homes,  I  would  have  killed  him  that  day  at  the  Horseshoe."
He  accompanied  the  exiles  of  1838,  but  afterward  returned  to  his  old
home;  he  was  allowed  to  remain,  and  in  recognition  of  his  serv-
ices the  state  legislature,  by  special  act,  in  1847  conferred  upon
him  the  right  of  citizenship  and  granted  to  him  a  tract  of  land  in  fee
simple,  but  without  power  of  alienation.4  This  reservation  was  in  the
Cheowa  Indian  settlement,  near  the  present  Robbinsville,  in  Graham
county,  where  he  died  about  the  year  185S.  His  grave  is  still  to  be
seen  just  outside  of  Robbinsville.
1  The  facts  concerning  Yonaguska  are  based  on  the  author's  personal  information  obtained  from
Colonel  Thomas,  supplemented  from  conversations  with  old  Indians.  The  date  of  his  death  ami  his
approximate  age  are  taken  from  the  Terrell  roll.  He  is  also  noticed  at  length  in  Lanman's  Letters  from
the  Alleghany  Mountains,  1848,  and  in  Zeigler  and  Grosseup's  Heart  of  the  Alleghanies,  1883.  The
trance  which,  according  to  Thomas  and  Lanman,  lasted  about  one  day,  is  stretched  by  the  last-named
authors  to  fifteen  .lays,  with  the  whole  1,200  Indians  marching  and  countermarching  around  the
sleeping  b<  dy '.
°  The  name  in  the  treaties  occurs  as  Yonahequah  (1798),  Yohanaqua  (1805),  and  Yonah  (1819).—
Indian  Treaties,  pp.  82,  123,  268;  Washington,  1837.
;  The  name  refers  to  something  habitually  falling  from  a  leaning  position.
*  Act  quoted  in  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  for  1895,  p.  636,  1896.


TEMPORARY     INCORPORATION    OF    CATAWBA  L65
As  illustrative  of  his  shrewdne&s  it  is  t < >  1  < I  thai  he  once  tracked  a
little  Indian  girl  to  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  where  she  had  been
carried  by  kidnappers  and  sold  as  a  slave,  and  regained  her  freedom  by
proving,  from  experl  microscopic  examination,  that  her  hair  had  none
of  the  negro  characteristics.1
Christianity  was  introduced  among  the  Kituhwa  Cherokee  shortly
before  the  Removal  through  Worcester  and  Boudinot's  translation  of
Matthew,  first  published  at  New  Echota  in  L829.  In  the  absenceof
missionaries  the  book  was  read  by  the  Indians  from  house  to  house.
After  the  Removal  a  Methodist  minister.  Reverend  Ulrich  Keener,
began  to  make  visits  for  preaching  at  irregular  intervals,  and  was  fol-
lowed several  years  later  by  Baptist  workers.2
In  the  fall  of    1839  the  C   lissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  reported
that  the  East  Cherokee  had  recently  expressed  a  desire  to  join  their
brethren  in  the  West,  but  had  been  deterred  from  so  doing  by  the
unsettled  condition  of  affairs  in  the  Territory.  He  states  that  "  thej'
have  a  right  to  remain  or  to  go,"  hut  that  as  the  interests  of  others
are  involved  in  their  decision  they  should  decide  without  delay/'
In  L840  about  one  hundred  Catawba,  nearly  all  that  were  left  of  the
tribe,  being  dissatisfied  with  their  condition  in  South  Carolina,  moved
up  in  a  body  and  took  up  their  residence  with  the  Cherokee.  Latent
tribal  jealousies  broke  out.  however,  and  at  their  own  request  nego-
tiations were  begun  in  1848,  through  Thomas  and  others,  for  their
removal  to  Indian  Territory.  The  effort  being  without  result,  they
.soon  after  began  to  drift  back  to  their  own  homes,  until,  in  1852,  there
were  only  about  a  dozen  remaining  among  the  Cherokee.  In  1890
only  one  was  left,  an  old  woman,  the  widow  of  a  Cherokee  husband.
She  and  her  daughter,  both  of  whom  spoke  the  language,  were  expert
potters  according  to  the  Catawba  method,  which  differs  markedly  from
that  of  the  Cherokee.  There  are  now  two  Catawba  women,  both  mar-
ried to  Cherokee  husbands,  living  with  the  tribe,  and  practicing  their
native  potter's  art.  While  residing  among  the  ( Jherokee,  the  ( 'atawba
acquired  a  reputation  as  doctors  and  leaders  of  the  dance.1
On  August  6,  1846,  a  treaty  was  concluded  at  Washington  with  the
representatives  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  west  by  which  the  rights  of
the  East  Cherokee  to  a  participation  in  the  benefits  of  the  New  Echota
treaty  of  L835  were  distinctly  recognized,  and  provision  was  made  for
a  final  adjustment  of  all  unpaid  and  pending  claims  due  under  that
treaty.     The  right  claimed  by  the  Hast  Cherokee  to  participate  in  the
The  facta  concerning  Junaluska  are  from  the  author's  information  obtained  from  i  tolonel  Tl   m*.
i  'aptain  James  Terrell,  and  Cherokee  informants. -  Author's  information  from  Colonel  rh   as.
'Commissioner Crawford,  November25,  Report  <>(  Indian  Commission!  i
•Author's  informiitic.n  from  Colonel  Thomas,  Captain  Terrell,  and  Indian  sources;  Commissi   rW.
Medill,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  399, 1848;  i  lommissioner  Orlando  Broun.  Report  of  Indian
Commissioner  for  1849,  p.  14, 1850.


166  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
benefits  of  the  New  Echota  treaty,  although  not  denied  by  the  gov-
ernment, had  been  held  to  be  conditional  upon  their  removal  to  the
West.1 In  the  spring  of  L848  the  author.  Lanman,  visited  the  East  Chero-
kee and  has  left  an  interesting  account  of  their  condition  at  the  time,
together  with  a  description  of  their  ballplays,  dances,  and  customs
generally,  having  been  the  guest  of  Colonel  Thomas,  of  whom  he
speaks  as  the  guide,  counselor,  and  friend  of  the  Indians,  as  well  as
their  business  agent  and  chief,  so  that  the  connection  was  like  that
existing  between  a  father  and  his  children.  He  puts  the  number  of
Indians  at  about  sou  Cherokee  and  100  Catawba  on  the  "Quallatown"
reservation — the  name  being  in  use  thus  early — with  '200  more  Indians
residing  in  the  more  westerly  portion  of  the  state.  Of  their  general
condition  he  says:
About  three-fourths  of  the  entire  population  can  read  in  their  own  language,  ami,
though  the  majority  of  them  understand  English,  a  very  few  can  speak  the  language.
They  practice,  to  a  considerable  extent,  the  science  of  agriculture,  ami  have  acquired
such  a  knowledge  of  the  mechanic  arts  as  answers  them  for  all  ordinary  purposes,
for  they  manufacture  their  own  clothing,  their  own  ploughs,  and  other  farming  uten-
sils, their  own  axes,  and  even  their  own  guns.  Their  women  are  no  longer  treated  as
slaves,  hut  as  equals;  the  men  labor  in  the  fields  and  their  wives  are  devoted  entirely
to  household  employments.  They  keep  the  same  domestic  animals  that  are  kept  by
their  white  neighbors,  and  cultivate  all  the  common  grains  of  the  country.  They
are  probably  as  temperate  as  any  other  class  of  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  honest
in  their  business  intercourse,  moral  in  their  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,  anil  distin-
guished for  their  faithfulness  in  performing  the  duties  of  religion.  They  are  chiefly
Methodists  and  Baptists,  and  have  regularly  ordained  ministers,  who  preach  to  them
on  every  Sabbath,  and  they  have  also  abandoned  many  of  their  mere  senseless  super-
stitions. They  have  their  own  court  and  try  their  criminals  by  a  regular  jury.
Their  judges  and  lawyers  are  chosen  from  among  themselves.  They  keep  in  order
the  public  roads  leading  through  their  settlement.  By  a  law  of  the  state  they  have
a  right  to  vote,  but  seldom  exercise  that  right,  as  they  do  not  like  the  idea  of  being
identified  with  any  of  the  political  parties.  Excepting  on  festive  days,  they  dress
after  the  manner  of  the  white  man,  but  far  more  picturesquely.  They  live  in  small
log  houses  of  their  own  construction,  ami  have  everything  they  need  or  desire  in  the
way  of  food.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  happiest  community  that  I  have  yet  met  with
in  this  southern  country. -
Among  the  other  notables  Lanman  speaks  thus  of  Sala'li,  "Squirrel,"
a  born  mechanic  of  the  band,  who  died  only  a  few  years  since:
He  is  quite  a  young  man  and  has  a  remarkably  thoughtful  face.  He  is  the  black-
smith of  his  nation,  and  with  some  assistance  supplies  the  whole  of  Quallatown  with
all  their  axes  and  plows;  but  what  is  more,  he  has  manufactured  a  number  of  very
superior  rifles  and  pistols,  including  stock,  barrel,  and  lock,  ami  he  isalso  the  builder
of  grist  mills,  which  grind  all  the  corn  which  his  people  eat.  A  specimen  of  his
workmanship  in  the  way  of  a  rifle  may  be  seen  at  the  Patent  Office  in  Washington,
where  it  was  deposited  by  Mr.  Thomas;  and  I  believe  Salola  is  the  first  Indian  who
'  Syllepsis  of  the  treaty,  etc.,  in  Royee,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
pp.  300-313,1888;  see  also  ante,  ]..  lis.
:Lanman,  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  pp.  94-95,  1849.


EAST    CHEROKEE    CENSUS  — 1848  167
ever  manufactured  an  entire  gun.     But  when  it  is  remembered  thai  he  nevei
a  particle  of  education  in  any  of  the  mechanic  arts  but  is  entirely  self  taught,  his
attainments  must  be  considered  truly  remarkable.'
On  July  29,  1848,  Congress  approved  an  art  for  taking  a  census  of
all  those  Cherokee  who  bad  remained  in  North  Carolina  after  the
Removal,  and  who  still  resided  east  of  the  Mississippi,  in  order  that
their  share  of  the  "removal  and  subsistence  fund'1  under  the  New
Echota  treaty  might  !><■  set  aside  for  them.  A  sum  equivalent  to
s.v:. :',:'.'  «^  at  the  same  time  appropriated  for  each  one.  or  his  repre
sentative,  to  be  available  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  bis  remoi  a]  to
the  Cherokee  Nation  west  and  subsistence  there  for  one  year  whenever
he  should  elect  so  to  remove.  Any  surplus  over  such  expense  was  tc
be  paid  to  him  in  cash  after  his  arrival  in  the  west.  The  whole  amount
thus  expended  was  to  be  reimbursed  to  the  Government  from  the  gen-
eral fund  to  the  credit  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  under  the  terms  of  the
treaty  of  New  Echota.  In  the  meantime  it  was  ordered  that  to  each
individual  thus  entitled  should  be  paid  the  accrued  interest  on  this  per
capita  sum  from  the  date  of  the  ratification  of  the  New  Echota  treaty
(May  23,  L836),  payment  of  interest  at  the  same  rate  to  continue
annually  thereafter.-'  In  accordance  with  this  act  a  census  of  the  Cher- okee then  residing  in  North  Carolina.  Tennessee,  and  Georgia,  was
completed  in  the  fall  of  1848  by  .1.  C.  Mullay,  making  the  whole  num-
ber 2,133.  On  the  basis  of  this  enrollment  several  payments  were
made  to  them  by  special  agents  within  the  next  ten  years,  one  being
a  pet-capita  payment  by  Alfred  Chapman  in  1851-52  of  unpaid  claims
arising  under  the  treaty  of  New  Echota  and  amounting  in  the  aggre-
gate to  $197,534.50,  the  others  being  payments  of  the  annual  interest
upon  the  ••  removal  and  subsistence  fund"  set  apart  to  their  credit  in I  848.  In  the  accomplishment  of  these  payments  two  other  enrollments
were  made  by  D.  W.  Siler  in  1851  and  by  Chapman  in  1852,  the  last
being  simply  a  corrected  revision  of  the  Siler  roll,  and  neither  vary-
ing greatly  from  the  Mullay  roll.3
Upon  the  appointment  of  Chapman  to  make  the  per  capita  payment
above  mentioned,  the  Cherokee  Nation  west  had  filed  a  protest  against
the  payment,  upon  the  double  ground  that  the  East  Cherokee  had  for-
feited their  right  to  participation,  and  furthermore  that  their  census
was  believed  to  lie  enormously  exaggerated.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the
number  first  reported   by  Mullay   was  only  1.517.  to  which   so   many
1  Lanman,  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  p.  111.
quoted  in  "The  United  States  of  America  it.  William  II.  Thomas  cf  al."\  also  Royce,  Cher-
okee Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p  313,  1888.  In  the  earlier  notices  the  terms '  N'orth
Carolina  Cherokee  "  ami  ■■  Eastern  Cherokee  "  are  used  synonymou  ginal  fugitives  were all  in  North  Carolina.
'See  Royce,  op.  ■  it-,  pp.  313-314;  Commissioner  II-  Price,  Report  of  Ind
1884     Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,    p.   195,  1898;  also  references   bj   Commissioner  W.   Medill,
Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  399,  1848;  ami  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  tor  1855,  p,  j  i  i   1856.


168  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.ann.19
were  subsequently  added  as  to  increase  the  number  by  more  than  600.'
A  census  taken  by  their  agent,  Colonel  Thomas,  in  1N41.  gave  the
number  of  East  Cherokee  (possibly  only  those  in  North  Carolina
intended)  as  L,220,2  while  a  year  later  the  whole  number  residing  in
North  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and  Georgia  was  officially  esti-
mated at  from  l.ooo  to  L,200.3  It  is  not  the  only  time  a  per  capita
payment  has  resulted  in  a  sudden  increase  of  the  census  population.
In  L852  (Capt.)  James  \V.  Terrell  was  engaged  by  Thomas,  then  in
the  state  senate,  to  take  charge  of  his  store  at  Qualla,  and  remained
associated  with  him  and  inclose  contact  with  the  Indians  from  then  until
after  the  close  of  the  war.  assisting,  as  special  United  States  agent,  in
the  disbursement  of  the  interest  payments,  and  afterward  as  a  Con-
federate officer  in  the  organization  of  the  Indian  companies,  holding  a
commission  as  captain  of  Company  A,  Sixty-ninth  North  Carolina
Confederate  infantry.  Being  of  an  investigating  bent.  Captain  Terrell
was  led  to  give  attention  to  the  customs  and  mythology  of  the  Cher-
okee, and  to  accumulate  a  fund  of  information  on  the  subject  seldom
possessed  by  a  white  man.  He  still  resides  at  Webster,  a  few  miles
from  the  reservation,  and  is  now  seventy -one  years  of  age.
In  1855  Congress  directed  the  per  capita  payment  to  the  East  Cher-
okee of  the  removal  fund  established  for  them  in  1848,  provided  that
North  Carolina  should  first  give  assurance  that  they  would  be  allowed
to  remain  permanently  in  that  state.  This  assurance,  however,  was
not  given  until  1S66,  a^nd  the  money  was  therefore  not  distributed,
but  remained  in  the  treasury  until  1875,  when  it  was  made  applicable
to  the  purchase  of  lands  and  the  quieting  of  titles  for  the  benefit  of
the  Indians.4
From  1855  until  after  the  civil  war  we  find  no  official  notice  of  the
East  Cherokee,  and  our  information  must  be  obtained  from  other
sources.  It  was,  however,  a  most  momentous  period  in  their  history.
At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  Thomas  was  serving  his  seventh  consec-
utive term  in  the  state  senate.  Being  an  ardent  Confederate  sym-
pathizer, he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  convention  which  passed  the
secession  ordinance,  and  immediately  after  voting  in  favor  of  that
measure  resigned  from  the  senate  in  order  to  work  for  the  southern
canst".  As  he  was  already  well  advanced  in  years  it  is  doubtful  if  his
effort  would  have  gone  beyond  the  raising  of  funds  and  other  supplies
but  for  the  fact  that  at  this  juncture  an  effort  was  made  by  the  Con
federate  General  Kirby  Smith  to  enlist  the  East  Cherokee  for  active
service.
The  agent  sent  for  this  purpose  was  Washington  Morgan,  known  to
the  Indians  as  A'ganst&'ta,  son  of  that  Colonel  Gideon  Morgan  who
i  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation, op. eit., p. 313  and  note.
-  Report  of  tin-  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  459-460, ,1845.
3  Commissioner  Crawford,  Report  of  Indian  Co
4  Royce,  op.  cit..  p.  314,


THE    THOM  \-     LEGION  1  69
had  commanded  the  Cherokee  at  the  Horseshoe  bend.  By  virtue  of
his  Indian  blood  and  historic  ancestry  he  was  deemed  the  most  fitting
emissary  for  the  purpose.  Early  in  1862  be  arrived  among  the
Cherokee,  and  by  appealing  to  old-time  memories  so  aroused  the  war
spirit  among  them  that  a  large  number  declared  themselves  ready  to
follow  wherever  he  led.  Conceiving  the  question  at  issue  in  the  war
to  be  one  that  did  not  concern  the  Indians,  Thomas  had  discouraged
their  participation  in  it  and  advised  them  to  remain  at  home  in  quiet
neutrality.  Now.  however,  knowing  Morgan's  reputation  for  reckless
daring,  he  became  alarmed  at  the  possible  result  to  them  of  such
leadership.  Forced  either  to  see  them  go  from  his  own  protection  or
to  lead  them  himself,  he  chose  the  latter  alternative  and  proposed  to
them  to  enlist  in  the  Confederate  legion  which  he  was  about  to  organize.
His  object,  as  he  himself  has  stated,  was  to  keep  them  out  of  danger
so  far  as  possible  by  utilizing  them  as  scouts  and  home  guards  through
the  mountains,  away  from  the  path  of  the  large  armies.  Nothing  of
this  was  said  to  the  Indians,  who  might  not  have  Keen  satisfied  with
such  an  arrangement.  Morgan  went  back  alone  and  the  Cherokee
enrolled  under  the  command  of  their  white  chief. '
The  "Thomas  Legion,"  recruited  in  1862  by  William  H.  Thomas  for
the  Confederate  service  and  commanded  by  him  as  colonel,  consisted
originally  of  one  infantry  regiment  of  ten  companies  (Sixty-ninth
North  Carolina  Infantry),  one  infantry  battalion  of  six  companies,  one
cavalry  battalion  of  eight  companies  (First  North  Carolina  Cavalry
Battalion),  one  field  battery  (Light  Battery)  of  103  officers  and  men.
and  one  company  of  engineers;  in  all  about  2.800  men.  The  infantry
battalion  was  recruited  toward  the  close  of  the  war  to  a  full  regiment
of  ten  companies.  Companies  A  and  B  of  the  Sixty  ninth  regiment
and  two  other  companies  of  the  infantry  regiment  recruited  later
were  composed  almost  entirely  of  East  Cherokee  Indians,  most  of  the
commissioned  officers  being  white  men.  The  whole  number  of  Chero-
kee thus  enlisted  was  nearly  four  hundred,  or  about  every  able-bodied
man  in  the  tribe.8
In  accordance  with  Thomas's  plan  the  Indians  were  employed  chiefly
as  scouts  and  home  guards  in  the  mountain  region  along  the  Tennessee-
Carolina  border,  where,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Colonel  String-
1  Tin-  history  of  the  events  leading  to  the  organization  of  the  "Thomas  Legion "  is  chiefly  man  the
author's  conversations  with  Colonel  Thomas  himself,  corroborated  and  supplemented  from  other sources.  In  the  words  of  Thomas,  "  If  it  had  nol  been  for  the  Indians  I  would  not  have  been  in  the
war." -This  is  believed  i"  be  i  correct  statement  of  the  strength  and  make-up  of  tin-  Thomas  Legion,
Owing  !■■  i  in-  Imperfection  of  the  records  and  the  absence  of  reliable  memoranda  among  the  surviv- ing officers,  no  two  accounts  exactly  coincide.  The  mil  given  in  the  North  Carolina  Confederate
Roster,  handed  in  by  captain  Terrell,  assistant  quartermaster,  was  compiled  early  in  the  war  and
-  i   tice  "f  tlu'  engineer  company  "i  "i  the  second  Infantry  regiment,  which  Included  tun
[ndian  companies,    The  information  therein  contained  is  supplemented  Er   :onversations
and  personal  letter   laptain  Terrell,  and  from  letters  and  newspaper  articles  by  Lieutenant  Colonel
Stringfleld  of  the  Sixty-ninth.    Another  statement  isgivenin  Mrs  Avery's  sketch  of  Colonel  n   as in  thi   Sorth  Carolina  University  Magazine  for  May,  1899.


170  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ass.1S
field,  "they  did  good  work  and  service  for  the  South."  The  most
important  engagement  in  which  they  were  concerned  occurred  at
Baptist  yap,  Tennessee,  September  15,  1862,  where  Lieutenant  Astu'-
gata'ga,  "a  splendid  specimen  of  Indian  manhood,"  was  killed  in  a charge.  The  Indians  were  furious  at  his  death,  and  before  they  could
he  restrained  they  scalped  one  or  two  of  the  Federal  dead.  For  this
action  ample  apologies  were  afterward  given  by  their  superior  officers.
The  war.  in  fact,  brought  out  all  the  latent  Indian  in  their  nature.
Before  starting  to  the  front  every  man  consulted  an  oracle  stone  to
learn  whether  or  not  he  might  hope  to  return  in  safety.  The  start
was  celebrated  with  a  grand  old-time  war  dance  at  the  townhouse  on
Soco,  and  the  same  dance  was  repeated  at  frequent  intervals  there-
after, the  Indians  being  "painted  and  feathered  in  good  old  style,"' Thomas  himself  frequently  assisting  as  master  of  ceremonies.  The
ballplay,  too,  was  not  forgotten,  and  on  one  occasion  a  detachment  of
Cherokee,  left  to  guard  a  bridge,  became  so  engrossed  in  the  excite-
ment of  the  game  as  to  narrowly  escape  capture  by  a  sudden  dash  of
the  Federals.  Owing  to  Thomas's  care  for  their  welfare,  they  suffered
but  slightly  in  actual  battle,  although  a  number  died  of  hardship  and
disease.  When  the  Confederates  evacuated  eastern  Tennessee,  in  the
winter  of  1863-64,  some  of  the  white  troops  of  the  legion,  with  one  or
two  of  the  Cherokee  companies,  were  shifted  to  western  Virginia,  and
by  assignment  to  other  regiments  a  few  of  the  Cherokee  were  present
at  the  final  siege  and  surrender  of  Richmond.  The  main  body  of  the
Indians,  with  the  rest  of  the  Thomas  Legion,  crossed  over  into  North
Carolina  and  did  service  protecting  the  western  border  until  the  close
of  the  war,  when  they  surrendered  on  parole  at  Waynesville,  North
Carolina,  in  May,  1865,  all  those  of  the  command  being  allowed  to
keep  their  guns.  It  is  claimed  by  their  officers  that  they  were  the
last  of  the  Confederate  forces  to  surrender.  About  fifty  of  the  Cher-
okee veterans  still  survive,  nearly  half  of  whom,  under  conduct  of
Colonel  Stringfield,  attended  the  Confederate  reunion  at  Louisville,
Kentucky,  in  1900,  where  they  attracted  much  attention.1
In  1863,  by  resolution  of  February  lii,  the  Confederate  House  of
Representatives  called  for  information  as  to  the  number  and  condition
of  the  Fast  Cherokee,  and  their  pending  relations  with  the  Federal
government  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  with  a  view  to  continuing
these  relations  under  Confederate  auspices.  In  response  to  this
inquiry  a  report  was  submitted  by  the  Confederate  commissioner  of
Indian  affairs,  S.  S.  Scott,  based  on  information  furnished  by  Colonel
Thomas  and  Captain  James  W.  Terrell,  their  former  disbursing  agent,
showing  that  interest  upon  the  "  removal  and  subsistence  fund  "  estab-
i  Personal  Information  from  Colonel  W.  H.  Thomas,  LieutenanW3olonel  W.  W.  Stringfield  Captain
James  W.  Terrell,  Chief  N.  J.  Smith  (first  sergeant  Company  B),  and  others,  with  other  details  from
Moore's  (Confederate)  Roster  of  North  Carolina  Troops,  iv;  Raleigh,  1S82:  also  list  of  survivors  in
1890,  bj  Carrington,  in  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees,  Extra  Bulletin  of  Eleventh  Census,  p.  _i.  1892.


CHEROKEE    IN    UNION     \i:\IY  171
lished  in  1848  had  been  paid  annually  up  to  and  including  the  year
L859,  at  the  rate  of  $3.20  per  capita,  or  an  aggregate,  exclusive  of
disbursing  agent's  commission,  of  $4,838.40  annually,  based  upon  the
original  Mullay  enumeration  of  1,517.
Upon  receipt  of  this  report  it  was  enacted  by  the  Confederate  con-
gress thai  the  sum  of  $19,352.36  be  paid  the  East  Cherokee  to  cover
the  interest  period  of  four  years  from  Maj  23,  L860,  to  May  23,  L864.
In  this  connection  the  Confederate  commissioner  suggested  that  the
payment  be  made  in  provisions,  of  which  the  Indians  were  then
greatly  in  need,  and  which,  if  the  payment  were  made  in  cash,  they
would  be  unable  to  purchase,  on  account  of  the  general  scarcity.  He
adds  that,  according  to  his  information,  almost  every  Cherokee  capable
of  bearing  arms  was  then  in  the  Confederate  service.  The  roll  fur-
nished by  Captain  Terrell  is  the  original  .Mullay  roll  corrected  to  May.
L860,  no  reference  being  made  to  the  later  Mullay  enumeration  (2,133),
already  alluded  to.  There  i-  no  record  to  show  that  the  payment  thus
authorized  was  made,  and  as  the  Confederate  government  was  then  in
hard  -traits  it  i>  probable  that  nothing  further  was  done  in  the  matter.
In  submitting  his  statement  of  previous  payments,  Colonel  Thomas,
their  former  agent,  adds:
As  the  North  Carolina  Cherokeea  have,  like  their  brethren  west,  taken  up  arms
against  the  Lincoln  government, it  is  not  probable  that  any  further  advances  of
interest  will  be  made  bj  that  government  to  any  portion  of  the  Cherokee  tribe.  I
also  enclose  a  copy  of  the  act  of  July  29,  1848,  so  far  as  relates  t<.  the  North  Carolina
Cherokees,  and  a  printed  explanation  of  their  rights,  prepared  by  me  in  1851,  and
submitted  to  the  attorney-general,  and  his  opinion  thereon,  which  may  not  be  alto-
gether uninteresting  to  those  who  feed  an  interest  in  knowing  something  of  the
history  of  the  Cherokee  tribe  of  Indians,  whose  destiny  is  so  closely  identified  with
that  of  the  Southern  Confederacy.1
In  a  skirmish  near  Bryson  City  (then  Charleston).  Swain  county.
North  Carolina,  about  a  year  after  enlistment,  a  small  party  of
Cherokee  -perhaps  a  dozen  in  number — was  captured  by  a  detach-
nient  of  Union  troops  and  carried  to  Knoxville,  where,  having  become
dissatisfied  with  their  experience  in  the  Confederate  service,  they
were  easily  persuaded  to  go  over  to  the  Union  side.  Through
the  influence  of  their  principal  man.  Digane'skl,  several  other-  were
induced  to  desert  to  the  Union  army,  making  about  thirty  in  all.  As  a
part  of  the  Third  North  Carolina  Mounted  Volunteer  Infantry,  they
served  with  the  Union  forces  in  the  same  region  until  the  (dose  of  the
war.  when  they  returned  to  their  homes  to  find  their  tribesmen  so
bitterly  incensed  against  them  that  for  some  time  their  lives  were  in
danger.     Eight  of  these  are  -till  alive  in  1900.2
One  of  these  Union  Cherokee  had  brought  back  with  him  the  small-
1  Thomas-Terrell  manuscript  East  Cherokee  roll,  with  accompanying  letters,  1864  (Bur.Am.Eth. archives  I.
'Personal  information  from  Colonel  VV  H.Thomas,  Captain  J.W.Terrell,  Chief  S  J.Smith,  and
others;  see  also  Carrington  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees,  Extra  Bulletin  of  Eleventh  Census,  p  21   1892,


172  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ass.19
pox  from  sin  infected  camp  near  Knoxville.  Shortly  after  his  return
he  became  sick  and  soon  died.  As  the  characteristic  pustules  had  not
appeared,  the  disease  seeming  to  work  inwardly,  the  nature  of  his
sickness  was  not  at  first  suspected-  smallpox  having  been  an  unknown
disease  among  the  Cherokee  for  nearly  a  century — and  his  funeral  was
largely  attended.  A  week  later  a  number  of  those  who  had  been  pres-
ent became  sick,  and  the  disease  was  recognized  by  Colonel  Thomas  as
smallpox  in  all  its  virulence.  It  spread  throughout  the  tribe,  this
being  in  the  early  spring  of  1866,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of
Thomas,  who  brought  a  doctor  from  Tennessee  to  wait  upon  them,
more  than  one  hundred  of  the  small  community  died  in  consequence.
The  fatal  result  was  largely  due  to  the  ignorance  of  the  Indians,  who.
finding  their  own  remedies  of  no  avail,  used  the  heroic  aboriginal
treatment  of  the  plunge  bath  in  the  river  and  the  cold-water  douche,
which  resulted  in  death  in  almost  every  case.  Thus  did  the  war  bring
its  harvest  of  death,  misery,  and  civil  feud  to  the  East  Cherokee.1
Shortly  after  this  event  Colonel  Thomas  was  compelled  by  physical
and  mental  infirmity  to  retire  from  further  active  participation  in  the
affairs  of  the  East  Cherokee,  after  more  than  half  a  century  spent  in
intimate  connection  with  them,  during  the  greater  portion  of  which
time  he  had  been  their  most  trusted  friend  and  adviser.  Their  affairs
at  once  became  the  prey  of  confusion  and  factional  strife,  which  con-
tinued until  the  United  States  stepped  in  as  arbiter.
In  1868  Congress  ordered  another  census  of  the  East  Cherokee,  to
serve  as  a  guide  in  future  payments,  the  roll  to  include  only  those
persons  whose  names  had  appeared  upon  the  Mullay  roll  of  1848  and
their  legal  heirs  and  representatives.  The  work  was  completed  in  the
following  year  by  S.  H.  Sweatland,  and  a  payment  of  interest  then
due  under  former  enactment  was  made  by  him  on  this  basis.8  '"In
accordance  with  their  earnestly  expressed  desire  to  be  brought  under
the  immediate  charge  of  the  government  as  its  wards."  the  Congress which  ordered  this  last  census  directed  that  the  Commissioner  of  Indian
Affairs  should  assume  the  same  charge  over  the  East  Cherokee  as  over
other  tribes,  but  as  no  extra  funds  were  made  available  for  the  pur-
pose the  matter  was  held  in  abeyance.3  An  unratified  treaty  made
this  year  with  the  Cherokee  Nation  west  contained  a  stipulation  that
any  Cherokee  east  of  the  Mississippi  who  should  remove  to  the  Chero-
kee nation  within  three  years  should  be  entitled  to  full  citizenship  and
privileges  therein,  but  after  that  date  could  be  admitted  only  by  act
of  the  Cherokee  national  council.*
After  the   retirement    of    Thomas,    in    the   absence   of   any   active
1  Author's  information  from  Colonel  Thomas  and  others.  Various  informants  have  magnified  the
number  of  deaths  to  several  hundred,  but  the  estimate  here  given,  obtained  from  Thomas,  is  proba-
bly more  reliable.
- ■  Koyee.  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  314, 1888.
3 Commissioner  F.  A.  Walker,  Report  of  Italian  Commissioner,  p.  25, 1872.
'Koyee,  op.  eit.,  p.  353.


ADJUSTMENT    OF    TITLES    1873-76  17.".
governmental  supervision,  need  was  felt  of  some  central  authority.
( )n  December  9,  L86S,  a  general  council  of  the  East  ( !herokee  assembled
a i  ( !heowa,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.  took  preliminary  steps
toward  the  adoption  of  a  regular  form  of  tribal  government  under
a  constitution.  N.  J.  Smith,  afterward  principal  chief,  \\a>  clerk
of  the  council.  The  new  government  was  formally  inaugurated  on
December  1.  L870.  It  provided  for  a  first  and  a  second  chid'  to serve  for  a  term  of  two  years,  minor  officers  to  serve  one  year,  and
an  annual  council  representing  each  Cherokee  settlement  within  the
stateof  North  Carolina.  Ka'lahu', "All-bones," commonly  known  to  the
whites  as  Flying-squirrel  or  Sawnook  (Sawanu'gi),  was  elected  chief.
A  new  constitution  was  adopted  five  years  later,  by  which  the  chief's
term  of  office  was  tixed  at  four  years.'
The  status  of  the  lands  held  by  the  Indians  had  now  become  a  matter
of  serious  concern.  As  has  been  stated,  the  deeds  had  been  made  out
by  Thomas  in  his  own  name,  as  the  state  laws  at  that  time  forbade  Indian
ownership  of  real  estate.  In  consequence  of  his  losses  during  the
war  and  his  subsequent  disability,  the  Thomas  properties,  of  which
the  Cherokee  lands  were  technically  a  part,  had  become  involved,  so
that  the  entire  estate  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  creditors,  the  most
important  of  whom.  William  Johnston,  had  obtained  sheriff's  deeds  in
1869  for  all  of  these  Indian  lands  under  three  several  judgments  against
Thomas,  aggregating  $33,887. 1 1.  To  adjust  the  matter  so  as  to  secure
title  and  possession  to  the  Indians.  Congress  in  1870  authorized  suit  to
he  brought  in  their  name  for  the  recovery  of  their  interest.  This  suit
was  begun  in  May.  Isj:;.  in  the  United  States  circuit  court  for  western
North  Carolina.  A  year  later  the  matters  in  dispute  were  submitted
by  agreement  to  a  board  of  arbitrators,  whose  award  was  continued  by
the  court  in  November.   1S74.
The  award  finds  that  Thomas  had  purchased  with  Indian  funds  a
tract  estimated  to  contain  50,000  acres  on  Oconaluftee  river  and  Soco
creek,  and  known  as  the  Qualla  boundary,  together  with  a  number  of
individual  tracts  outside  the  boundary;  that  the  Indians  were  Mill
indebted  to  Thomas  toward  the  purchase  of  the  Qualla  boundary
lands  for  the  sum  of  $18,250,  from  which  should  be  deducted  $6,500
paid  by  them  to  Johnston  to  release  titles,  with  interest  to  date  of
award,  making  an  aggregate  of  $8,486,  toe-ether  with  a  further  sum
of  $2,478,  which  had  been  intrusted  to  Terrell,  the  business  clerk  and
assistant  of  Thomas,  and  by  him  turned  over  to  Thomas,  as  creditor  of
the  Indians,  under  power  of  attorney,  this  latter  sum.  with  interest  to
date  of  award,  aggregating  $2,697.89;  thus  leaving  a  balance  due  from
the  Indians  to  Thomas  or  his  Legal  creditor.  Johnston,  of  $7,066.11.
The  award  declares  that  on  account  of  the  questionable  manner  in
>  Constitution,  etc.,  quoted  in  Carrington,  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees,  Extra  Bulletin  Eleventh
Census,  pp.  ls-ju,  1892;  author's  personal  information


174  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
which  the  disputed  lands  had  been  bought  in  by  Johnston,  he  should
be  allowed  to  hold  them  only  as  security  for  the  balance  due  him  until
paid,  and  that  on  the  payment  of  the  said  balance  of  $7,066.11,  with
interest  at  6  per  cent  from  the  date  of  the  award,  the  Indians  should
be  entitled  to  a  clear  conveyance  from  him  of  the  legal  title  to  all  the
lands  embraced  within  the  Qualla  boundary.1 To  enable  the  Indians  to  clear  off  this  lien  on  their  lands  and  for
other  purposes,  Congress  in  LsT'>  directed  that  as  much  as  remained
of  the  •■  removal  and  subsistence  fund"  set  apart  for  their  benefit  in
1848  should  be  used  •"in  perfecting  the  titles  to  the  lands  awarded  to
them,  and  to  pay  the  costs,  expenses,  and  liabilities  attending  their
recent  litigations,  also  to  purchase  and  extinguish  the  titles  of  any
white  persons  to  lands  within  the  general  boundaries  allotted  to  them
by  the  court,  and  for  the  education,  improvement,  and  civilization  of
their  people."  In  accordance  with  this  authority  the  unpaid  balance and  interest  due  Johnston,  amounting  to  $7,212.76,  was  paid  him  in
the  same  year,  and  shortly  afterward  there  was  purchased  on  behalf  of
the  Indians  some  fifteen  thousand  acres  additional,  the  Commissioner
of  Indian  Affairs  being  constituted  trustee  for  the  Indians.  For  the
better  protection  of  the  Indians  the  lands  were  made  inalienable  except
by  assent  of  the  council  and  upon  approval  of  the  President  of  the
United  States.  The  deeds  for  the  Qualla  boundary  and  the  15.UO0
acre  purchase  were  executed  respectively  on  October  9,  1876,  and
August  11, 1880. 2  As  the  boundaries  of  the  different  purchases  were
but  vaguely  defined,  a  new  survey  of  the  whole  Qualla  boundary  and
adjoining  tracts  was  authorized.  The  work  was  intrusted  to  M.  S.
Temple,  deputy  United  States  surveyor,  who  completed  it  in  1876,  his
survey  maps  of  the  reservation  being  accepted  as  the  official  standard.3
The  titles  and  boundaries  having  been  adjusted,  the  Indian  Office
assumed  regular  supervision  of  East  Cherokee  affairs,  and  in  June.
1875,  the  first  agent  since  the  retirement  of  Thomas  was  sent  out  in
the  person  of  W.  C.  McCarthy.  He  found  the  Indians,  according  to
his  report,  destitute  and  discouraged,  almost  without  stock  or  farming
tools.  There  were  no  schools,  and  very  few  full-bloods  could  speak
English,  although  to  their  credit  nearly  all  could  read  and  write  their
own  language,  the  parents  teaching  the  children.  Under  his  authority
a  distribution  was  made  of  stock  animals,  seed  wheat,  and  farming
tools,  and  several  schools  were  started.     In   the  next  year,  however,
iSee  award  of  arbitrators.  Rufus  Barringer,  John  H.  Dillard,  and  T.  Ruffln,  with  ftdl  statement,  in
Eastern  Band  of  Cherokee  Indians  against  W.  T.  Thomas  et  al.  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  128,  53d  Cong.,  2d  sess.,
1894;  summary  in  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Kep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  315-318,  1888.
-s<e  Royce,  op.  Cit.,  pp.  315-318;  Commissioner  T.  .1.  Morgan.  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,
p.  xxix,  1890.    The  final  settlement,  under  the  laws  of  North  Carolina,  was  not  completed  until  1894.
'Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  315-318;  Carrington,  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees,  with  map  of  Temple  survey,
Extra  Bulletin  of  Eleventh  Census,  1892.


INVITATION     FROM    WESTERN     BAND       188]  1  7.r)
the  agency  was  discontinued  and  the  educational  interests  of  i  he  band
turned  over  to  the  state  school  superintendent.1
In  the  meantime  Ka'lalnV  had  been  succeeded  as  chief  by  Lloj'd  K.
Welch  i  l>a  'si  giya'gl),  an  educated  mixed-blood  of  Cheowa,  who  served
about  five  years,  dying  shortly  after  his  reelection  to  a  second  term
(48).  He  made  a  good  record  by  his  work  in  reconciling  the  various
faction-  which  had  sprung  up  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  guiding  influ-
ence of  Thomas,  and  in  defeating  the  intrigues  of  fraudulent  while
claimants  and  mischief  makers.  Shortly  before  his  death  the  ( rovern-
ment,  through  Special  Agent  John  A.  Sibbald,  recognized  his  authority
as  principal  chief,  together  with  the  constitution  which  had  been
adopteil  by  the  band  under  his  auspices  in  1ST5.  N.  J.  Smith  (Tsa'-
ladihi').  who  had  previously  served  as  clerk  of  the  council,  was  elected
to  his  unexpired  term  and  continued  to  serve  until  the  fall  of  L890.8
We  find  no  further  official  notice  of  the  East  Cherokee  until  L881,
when  Commissioner  Price  reported  that  they  were  still  without  agent
or  superintendent,  and  that  so  far  as  the  Indian  Office  was  concerned
their  affairs  were  in  an  anomalous  and  unsatisfactory  condition,  while
factional  feuds  were  adding  to  the  difficulties  and  retarding  the  prog-
ress of  the  band.  In  thespringof  that  year  a  visiting  delegation  from
the  Cherokee  Nation  west  had  extended  to  them  an  urgent  imitation
to  remove  to  Indian  Territory  and  the  Indian  Office  had  encouraged
the  project,  with  the  result  that  lt',1  persons  of  the  band  removed  dur-
ing the  year  to  Indian  Territory,  the  expense  being  borne  by  the
Government.  Others  were  represented  as  being  desirous  to  remove,
and  the  Commissioner  recommended  an  appropriation  for  the  purpose,
but  as  Congress  failed  to  act  the  matter  was  dropped.3
The  neglected  condition  of  the  Ea.st  Cherokee  having  been  brought
to  the  attention  of  those  old-time  friends  of  the  Indian,  the  Quakers,
through  an  appeal  made  in  their  behalf  by  members  of  that  society
residing  in  North  Carolina,  the  Western  Yearly  Meeting,  of  Indiana,
volunteered  to  undertake  the  work  of  civilization  and  education.  On
May  31,  L881,  representatives  of  the  Friends  entered  into  a  contract
with  the  Indians,  subject  to  approval  by  the  Government,  to  establish
and  continue  among  them  for  ten  years  an  industrial  school  and  other
common  schools,  to  lie  supported  in  part  from  the  annual  interest  of
the  trust  fund  held  by  the  Government  to  the  credit  of  the  East  Chero-
kee and  in  part  by  funds  furnished  by  the  Friends  themselves.  Through
the  efforts  of  Barnabas  C.  Hobbs,  of  the  Western  Yearly  Meeting,  a
yearly  contract  to  the  same  effect  was  entered  into  with  the  Commis-
!  Report  of  Agent  W.  C.  McCarthy,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  343-344,  1875;  and  Report  of Indian  Commissione,  pp.  118-119,  1876.
'Author's  personal  information:  sue  also  Carrington,  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees;  Zeigler  and Grosscup,  Heart  .,i  the  AUeghanies, pp. 35-36, 1883.
'Commissioner  H.Price,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  Ixiv-lxv,  1881,  and  Report  of  Indian
Commissioner,  pp.  Ixix-lxx,  1882;  see  also  ante,  p.  151.


17o  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
sioner  of  Indian  Affairs  later  in  the  same  year,  and  was  renewed  by
successive  commissioners  to  cover  the  period  of  ten  years  ending  June
30,  1892,  when  the  contract  system  was  terminated  and  the  Govern-
ment assumed  direct  control.  Under  the  joint  arrangement,  with  some
aid  at  the  outset  from  the  North  Carolina  Meeting,  work  was  begun
in  1881  by  Thomas  Brown  with  several  teachers  sent  out  by  the  Indiana
Friends,  who  established  a  small  training  school  at  the  agency  head-
quarters at  Cherokee,  and  several  day  schools  in  the  outlying  settle-
ments. He  was  succeeded  three  years  later  by  H.  W.  Spray,  an  expe-
rienced educator,  who,  with  a  corps  of  efficient  assistants  and  greatly
enlarged  facilities,  continued  to  do  good  work  for  the  elevation  of  the
Indians  until  the  close  of  the  contract  system  eight  years  later.1  After
an  interregnum,  during  which  the  schools  suffered  from  frequent
changes,  he  was  reappointed  as  government  agent  and  superintendent
in  1898,  a  position  which  he  still  holds  in  1901.  To  the  work  con-
ducted under  his  auspices  the  East  Cherokee  owe  much  of  what  they
have  to-day  of  civilization  and  enlightenment.
From  some  travelers  who  visited  the  reservation  about  this  time  we
have  a  pleasant  account  of  a  trip  along  Soco  and  a  day  with  Chief
Smith  at  Yellow  Hill.  They  describe  the  Indians  as  being  so  nearly
like  the  whites  in  their  manner  of  living  that  a  stranger  could  rarely
distinguish  an  Indian's  cabin  or  little  cove  farm  from  that  of  a  white
man.  Their  principal  crop  was  corn,  which  they  ground  for  them-
selves, and  they  had  also  an  abundance  of  apples,  peaches,  and  plums,
and  a  few  small  herds  of  ponies  and  cattle.  Their  wants  were  so  few
that  they  had  but  little  use  for  money.  Their  primitive  costume  had
long  been  obsolete,  and  their  dress  was  like  that  of  the  whites,  except-
ing that  moccasins  took  the  place  of  shoes,  and  they  manufactured
their  own  clothing  by  the  aid  of  spinning-wheels  and  looms.  Finely
cut  pipes  and  well-made  baskets  were  also  produced,  and  the  good
influence  of  the  schools  recently  established  was  already  manifest  in
the  children.8
In  1882  the  agency  was  reestablished  and  provision  was  made  for
taking  a  new  census  of  all  Cherokee  east  of  the  Mississippi,  Joseph
G.  Hester  being  appointed  to  the  work.3  The  census  was  submitted
as  complete  in  June,  1881,  and  contained  the  names  of  1,881  persons  in
North  Carolina,  758  in  Georgia,  213  in  Tennessee,  71  in  Alabama,  and
33  scattering,  a  total  of  2,956. '  Although  this  census  received  the
approval  and  certificate  of  the  East  Cherokee  council,  a  large  portion
of  the  band  still  refuse  to  recognize  it  as  authoritative,  claiming  that
a  large  number  of  persons  therein  enrolled  have  no  Cherokee  blood.
'See  Commissioner  T.J.Morgan,  Report  of  [ndian  Commissioner,  pp.  141-14.S,  1892;  author's  per-
sonal information  from  B.  ('.  Hobbs,  Chief  N*.  .1.  Smith,  ami  others.  For  further  notice  of  school
groM  Hi  see  also  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  426-427,  1897.
2Zeigler  and  Grosscup.  Heart  of  the  Alleghanies,  pp.  36-42,  1883.
•^Commissioner  H.  Price,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  Ixix-lxx,  1882.
*  Kvport  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  li-lii,  ls.s4.


SUIT     AGAINST    WESTERN    CHEROKEE       1883    8G  177
The  East  Cherokee  had  never  ceased  to  contend  for  a  participation
in  the  rights  and  privileges  accruing  to  the  western  Nation  under
treaties  with  the  Government.  In  L882  a  special  agenf  hud  been  ap-
pointed to  investigate  their  claims,  and  in  the  following  year,  under
authority  of  Congress,  the  eastern  hand  of  Cherokee  brought  suit  in
the  ( lourt  of  Claims  against  the  Tinted  States  and  the  Cherokee  Nation
west  to  determine  its  rights  in  the  permanent  annuity  fund  and  other
trust  funds  held  by  the  United  States  for  the  Cherokee  Indians.1  The
case  was  decided  adversely  t<>  the  eastern  hand,  first  bj  the  Court  of
Claim-  in  1885, !  and  finally,  on  appeal,  by  the  Supreme  Court  on
March  1,  lssti.  that  court  holding  in  its  decision  that  the  Cherokee  in
North  Carolina  had  dissolved  their  connection  with  the  Cherokee
Nation  and  ceased  to  he  a  part  of  it  when  they  refused  to  accompany
the  main  body  at  the  Removal,  and  that  if  Indians  in  North  Carolina  or
in  any  state  east  of  the  Mississippi  wished  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the
common  property  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  any  form  whatever  they
must  he  readmitted  to  citizenship  in  the  Cherokee  Nation  and  comply
with  its  constitution  and  laws.  In  accordance  with  this  decision  the
agent  in  the  Indian  territory  was  instructed  to  issue  no  more  resi-
dence permits  to  claimants  tor  Cherokee  citizenship,  and  it  was
officially  announced  that  all  persons  thereafter  entering  that  country
without  consent  of  the  Cherokee  authorities  would  he  treated  as
intruders.3  This  decision,  cutting  off  the  East  Cherokee  from  all
hope  of  sharing  in  any  of  the  treaty  benefits  enjoyed  by  their  western
kinsmen,  was  a  sore  disappointment  to  them  all.  especially  to  Chief
Smith,  who  had  worked  unceasingly  in  their  behalf  from  the  institu-
tion of  the  proceedings.  In  view  of  the  result.  Commissioner  Atkins
strongly  recommended,  as  the  best  method  of  settling  them  in  perma-
nent home-,  secure  from  white  intrusion  and  from  anxiety  on  account
of  their  uncertain  tenure  and  legal  status  in  North  Carolina,  that
negotiations  be  opened  through  government  channels  for  their
readmission  to  citizenship  in  the  Cherokee  Nation,  to  he  followed,  if
successful,  by  the  sale  of  their  lands  in  North  Carolina  and  their
removal  to  Indian  Territory.4
In  order  to  acquire  a  more  definite  legal  status,  the  Cherokee  resid-
ing in  North  Carolina  —being  practically  all  those  of  the  eastern
band  having  genuine  Indian  interests  —  became  a  corporate  body
under  the  laws  of  the  state  in  1889.  The  act.  ratified  on  March  11,
declares  in  its  first  section  ••That  the  North  Carolina  or  Eastern
Cherokee  Indians,  resident  or  domiciled  in  the  counties  of  Jackson,
Swain.  Graham,  and  Cherokee,  he  and   at  the  same  time   are    hereby
i  Commissioner  H.  Price,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  Ixix-lxxi,  i  lian   legisla-
tion," ibid.,  p.  214;  Commissioner  H.  Price,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  Ixv  Ixvi,  1883.
*  Commissioner  J.  I».  e.  Atkins,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  l\  *.  1885.
'Same  commissioner.  Ke|».n  .»i  the  Indian  Commissioner,  ]>.  xlv,  1886;  decision  quoted  by  same
commissioner.  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  lxxvii,  l-s;
■Same  commissioner,  Report  "i  the  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  li,  1886;  reiterated  by  him  in  Report lxxvii.
[9  Kin —  oi   12


17tS  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
created  and  constituted  a  body  politic  and  corporate  under  the  name,
style,  and  title  of  the  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokee  Indians,  with  all  the
rights,  franchises,  privileges  and  powers  incident  and  belonging  to
corporations  under  the  laws  of  the  state  of  North  Carolina.1
On  August  2,  1893,  ex-Chief  Smith  died  at  Cherokee,  in  the  fifty-
seventh  year  of  his  life,  more  than  twenty  of  which  had  been  given
to  the  service  of  his  people.  Nimrod  Jarrett  Smith,  known  to  the
Cherokee  as  Tsa'ladihi",  was  the  son  of  a  halfbreed  father  by  an  Indian
mother,  and  was  born  near  the  present  Murphj1,  Cherokee  county.
North  Carolina,  on  January  3.  1S3T.  His  earliest  recollections  were
thus  of  the  miseries  that  attended  the  flight  of  the  refugees  to  the
mountains  during  the  Removal  period.  His  mother  spoke  very  little
English,  but  his  father  was  a  man  of  considerable  intelligence,  having
acted  as  interpreter  and  translator  for  Reverend  Evan  Jones  at  the  old
Valleytown  mission.  As  the  hoy  grew  to  manhood  he  acquired  a  fair
education,  which,  aided  by  a  commanding  presence,  made  him  a  per-
son of  influence  among  his  fellows.  At  twenty -five  years  of  age  he
enlisted  in  the  Thomas  Legion  as  first  sergeant  of  Company  B,  Sixty-
ninth  North  Carolina  (Confederate)  Infantry,  and  served  in  that  capacity
till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  clerk  of  the  council  that  drafted  the
first  East  Cherokee  constitution  in  186S,  and  on  the  death  of  Principal
Chief  Lloyd  Welch  in  1880  was  elected  to  fill  the  unexpired  term,
continuing  in  office  by  successive  reelections  until  the  close  of  1891,  a
period  of  about  twelve  years,  the  longest  term  yet  filled  by  an  incum-
bent. As  principal  chief  he  signed  the  contract  under  which  the  school
work  was  inaugurated  in  1881.  For  several  years  thereafter  his
duties,  particularly  in  connection  with  the  suit  against  the  western
Cherokee,  required  his  presence  much  of  the  time  at  ATashington,
while  at  home  his  time  was  almost  as  constantly  occupied  in  attending
to  the  wants  of  a  dependent  people.  Although  he  was  entitled  under
the  constitution  of  the  band  to  a  salary  of  five  hundred  dollars  per  year,
no  part  of  this  salary  was  ever  paid,  because  of  the  limited  resources  of
his  people,  and  only  partial  reimbursement  was  made  to  him,  shortly
before  his  death,  for  expenses  incurred  in  official  visits  to  Washington.
With  frequent  opportunities  to  enrich  himself  at  the  expense  of  his
people,  he  maintained  his  honor  and  died  a  poor  man.
In  person  Chief  Smith  was  a  splendid  specimen  of  physical  man-
hood, being  six  feet  four  inches  in  height  and  built  in  proportion,
erect  in  figure,  with  flowing  black  hair  curling  down  over  his  shoulders.
a  deep  musical  voice,  and  a  kindly  spirit  and  natural  dignity  that
never  failed  to  impress  the  stranger.  His  widow — a  white  woman —
and  several  children  survive  him.2
■See  act  in  full,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  vol.  I,  pp.  680-681,  1891.
•  From  author's  personal  acquaintance;  see  also  Zeigler  and  Grosscup,  Heart  of  the  Alleghanies,
pp.  38-39,  Issb;  iVgent  .1.  L.  Holmes,  in  Repiort  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  160,  1S85;  Commissioner
T.  .1.  Morgan,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  142,  1892;  Moore,  Roster  of  the  North  Carolina
Troops,  iv,  1882.


BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY  NINETEENTH    ANNUAL    REPORT      PL     X
CHIEF     N.    J.    SMITH     iTSALADIHI'




hookey]  PRESENT    CONDITION  L79
In  isi»-t  the  long-standing  litigation  between  the  Eas<  Cherokee
and  a  number  of  creditors  and  claimants  to  Indian  land-,  within  and
adjoining  the  Qualla  boundary  was  finally  settled  bj  a  compromise
by  which  the  several  white  tenants  and  claimants  within  the  boundary
agreed  to  execute  a  quitclaim  and  vacate  on  paymenl  to  them  by  the
Indians  of  sums  aggregating  $24,552,  while  for  another  disputed
adjoining  tract  of  33,000  acres  the  United  Stales  agreed  to  pay,  for
the  Indian-,  at  the  rate  of  $1.25  per  acre.  The  necessarj  Government
approval  having  been  obtained,  Congress  appropriated  a  sufficienl
amount  for  carrying  into  effect  the  agreement,  thus  at  last  completing
a  perfect  and  unincumbered  title  t<>  all  the  lands  claimed  by  the
Indians,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  outlying  tracts  of  comparative.
unimportance.1
In  1895  the  Cherokee  residing-  in  North  Carolina  upon  the  reserva
tion  and  in  the  outlying  settlements  were  officially  reported  to  number
1.47'.'. '  A  vear  later  an  epidemic  of  grippe  spread  through  the  band,
with  the  result  that  the  census  of  L897  shows  but  1,312, s  among  those
who  died  at  this  time  being  Big-witch  (Tskil-e'gwa),  the  oldest  man  of
the  band,  who  distinctly  remembered  the  Creek  war.  and  Wadi'yahi,
the  last  old  woman  who  preserved  the  art  of  making  double-walled
baskets.  In  the  next  year  the  population  had  recovered  to  1,351.
The  description  of  the  mode  of  living'  then  common  to  most  of  the
Indians  will  apply  nearly  as  well  to-day:
While  they  are  industrious,  these  people  are  not  progressive  farmers  ami  have
learned  nothing  of  modern  methods.  The  same  crops  are  raised  continuously  until
the  soil  will  yield  no  more  or  is  washed  away,  when  new  ground  is  cleared  or  broken.
The  value  of  rotation  ainl  fertilizing  has  not  yet  been  discovered  or  taught.     .     .     .
That  these  people  can  live  at  all  upon  the  products  of  their  small  farms  is  due  to
the  extreme  simplicity  of  their  food,  dress,  and  manner  of  living.  The  typical
house  is  of  logs,  is  about  fourteen  by  sixteen  feet,  of  one  room,  just  high  enough  for
the  occupants  to  stand  erect,  with  perhaps  a  small  loft  for  the  storage  of  extras.
The  roof  is  of  split  shingles  or  shakes.  There  is  no  window,  the  open  door  furnish-
ing what  1  i s_r  1 1 1  is  required.  At  .me  end  of  the  house  is  the  fireplace,  with  outside
chimney  of  stones  or  sticks  chinked  with  clay.  The  furniture  is  simple  and  cheap.
An  iron  pot,  a  hake  kettle,  a  coffeepot  and  mill,  small  table,  and  a  few  cups,  knives,
and  spoons  arc  all  that  is  needed.  These,  with  .me  or  two  bedsteads,  homemade,  a
few  pillows  and  quilts,  with  feather  mattresses  for  «  inter  covering,  as  well  as  for  the
usual  purpose,  constitute  the  principal  house  possessions.     For  outdoor  work  there
is  an  ax,  hoe,  ami  shovel  plow.     A  wagon  or  cart  may  1   wned,  hut  i-  uol  essi  u-
tial.  The  outfit  is  inexpensive  and  answers  every  purpose.  The  usual  food  is  bean
bread,  with  coffee.  In  the  fall  chestnut  bread  is  also  used.  Beef  is  seldom  eaten.
but  pork  is  highly  esteemed,  and  a  considerable  number  of  hogs  are  kept,  running
wild  and  untended  in  summer.4
By  the  most  recent  official  count,  in  1900,  the  East  Cherokee  resid-
ing in  North  Carolina  under  direct  charge  of  the  agent   and  included
I  ommissioner  D.M.  Browning,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  for  1894,  pp.  81-82,  1  >'.>">:  also  Agent T.  W  .  Potti  i.  ibid  .  p     96
= Agent  T.  W.  Potter,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner  for  1895,  p.  887,  1896.
:   C   Hart,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p  208,1897
'Agent  J.  C.  Hart.  Report  of  Indian  Commissi   r,  pp.  218-219,  1898.


180  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.axn.19
within  the  act  of  incorporation  number  1,376,  of  whom  about  L,100
are  on  the  reservation,  the  rest  living  farther  to  the  west,  on  Nanta-
hala,  Cheowa,  and  Hiwassee  rivers.  This  does  not  include  mixed-
bloods  in  adjoining  states  and  some  hundreds  of  unrecognized  claim-
ants. Those  enumerated  own  approximately  100,000  acres  of
land,  of  which  83,000  are  included  within  the  Qualla  reservation
and  a  contiguous  tract  in  Jackson  and  Swain  counties.  They  receive
no  rations  or  annuities  and  are  entirely  self-supporting,  the  annual
interest  on  their  trust  fund  established  in  1848,  which  has  dwindled  to
about  $23,000,  being  applied  to  the  payment  of  taxes  upon  their  unoc-
cupied common  lands.  From  time  to  time  they  have  made  leases  of
timber,  gold-washing,  and  grazing  privileges,  but  without  any  great
profit  to  themselves.  By  special  appropriation  the  government  sup-
ports an  industrial  training  school  at  Cherokee,  the  agency  head-
quarters, in  which  170  pupils  are  now  being  boarded,  clothed,  and
educated  in  the  practical  duties  of  life.  This  school,  which  in  its  work-
ings is  a  model  of  its  kind,  owes  much  of  its  usefulness  and  high
standing  to  the  efficient  management  of  Prof.  H.  W.  Spray  (Wilsini'),
already  mentioned,  who  combines  the  duties  of  superintendent  and
agent  for  the  band.  His  chief  clerk,  Mr  James  Blythe  (Diskwa''m,
"Chestnut-bread"),  a  Cherokee  by  blood,  at  one  time  tilled  the  posi-
tion of  agent,  being  perhaps  the  only  Indian  who  has  ever  served  in
such  capacity.
The  exact  legal  status  of  the  East  Cherokee  is  still  a  matter  of  dis-
pute, they  being  at  once  wards  of  the  government,  citizens  of  the
United  States,  and  (in  North  Carolina)  a  corporate  body  under  state
laws.  They  pay  real  estate  taxes  and  road  service,  exercise  the  voting
privilege,1  and  are  amenable  to  the  local  courts,  but  do  not  pay  poll
tax  or  receive  any  pauper  assistance  from  the  counties;  neither  can
they  make  free  contracts  or  alienate  their  lands  (19).  Under  their
tribal  constitution  they  are  governed  by  a  principal  and  an  assistant
chief,  elected  for  a  term  of  four  years,  with  an  executive  council
appointed  by  the  chief,  and  sixteen  councilors  elected  by  the  various
settlements  for  a  term  of  two  years.  The  annual  council  is  held  in
October  at  Cherokee,  on  the  reservation,  the  proceedings  being  in
the  Cherokee  language  and  recorded  by  their  clerk  in  the  Cherokee
alphabet,  as  well  as  in  English.  The  present  chief  is  Jesse  Keid
(Tse'si-Ska'tsi,  '-Scotch  Jesse"),  an  intelligent  mixed-blood,  who  tills
the  office  with  dignity  and  ability.  As  a  people  they  are  peaceable  and
law-abiding,  kind  and  hospitable,  providing  for  their  simple  wants  by
their  own  industry  without  asking  or  expecting  outside  assistance.
Their  fields,  orchards,  and  fish  traps,  with  some  few  domestic  animals
and  occasional  hunting,  supply  them  with  food,  while  by  the  sale  of
i  At  the  recent  election  in  November,  1900,  they  were  debarred  by  the  local  polling  officers  from
either  registering  or  voting,  and  the  matter  is  now  being  contested.


hooneyJ  PRESENT    CONDITION  1S1
ginseng  and  other  medicinal  plants  gathered  in  the  mountains,  with
fruit  and  honey  of  their  own  raising,  they  procure  what  additional
supplies  they  need  from  the  traders.  The  majority  are  fairly  com-
fortable, far  above  the  condition  of  most  Indian  tribes,  and  hut  little,
if  any.  behind  their  white  neighbors.  In  literary  ability  they  may
even  be  -aid  to  surpass  them,  as  in  addition  to  the  result  of  nearly
twenty  years  of  school  work  among  the  younger  people,  nearly  all  the
men  and  some  of  the  women  can  read  and  write  their  own  language.
All  wear  civilized  costumes,  though  an  occasional  pair  of  moccasins
is  seen,  while  the  women  find  means  to  gratify  the  racial  love  of
color  in  the  wearing  of  red  bandanna  kerchiefs  in  place  of  bonnets.  The
older  people  still  cling  to  their  ancient  rites  and  sacred  traditions,  hut
the  dance  and  the  ballplay  wither  and  the  Indian  day  is  nearly  spent.


Ill— NOTES  TO  THE  HISTORICAL  SKETCH
(1)  Tribal  synonymy  (page  15):  Very  few  Indian  tribes  are  known  to  us  under
the  names  by  which  they  call  themselves.  One  reason  for  this  is  the  fact  that  the
whites  have  usually  heard  of  a  tribe  from  its  neighbors,  speaking  other  languages,
before  coming  upon  the  tribe  itself.  Many  of  the  popular  tribal  names  were  origi-
nally nicknames  bestowed  by.  neigh  boring  tribes,  frequently  referring  to  some  peculiar
custom,  and  in  a  large  number  of  cases  would  be  strongly  repudiated  by  the  people
designated  by  them.  As  a  rule  each  tribe  had  a  different  name  in  every  surrounding
Indian  language,  besides  those  given  by  Spanish,  French,  Dutch,  or  English  settlers.
YCm'uiyii' — This  word  is  compounded  from  yunirl  (person)  and  yd  (real  or  prin-
cipal). The  assumption  of  superiority  is  much  in  evidence  in  Indian  tribal  names;
thus,  the  Iroquois,  Delawares,  and  Pawnee  call  themselves,  respectively,  Ofiwe-
honwe,  Leni-lenape',  and  Tsariksi-tsa'riks,  all  of  which  maybe  rendered  "men  of
men,"  "men  surpassing  other  men,"  or  "real  men."
KUu'hwagl — This  word,  which  can  not  be  analyzed,  is  derived  from  Kitu'hwa,  the
name  of  an  ancient  Cherokee  settlement  formerly  on  Tuckasegee  river,  just  above
the  present  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  It  is  noted  in  1730  as
one  of  the  "seven  mother  towns"  of  the  tribe.  Its  inhabitants  were  called  Ani'-
Kltu'hwagl  (people  of  Kituhwa),  and  seem  to  have  exercised  a  controlling  influence
over  those  of  all  the  towns  on  the  waters  of  Tuckasegee  and  the  upper  part  of  Little
Tennessee,  the  whole  body  being  frequently  classed  together  as  Ani'-KItu'hwagl.
The  dialect  of  these  towns  held  a  middle  place  linguistically  between  those  spoken
to  the  east,  on  the  heads  of  Savannah,  and  to  the  west,  on  Hiwassee,  Cheowah,  and
the  lower  course  of  Little  Tennessee.  In  various  forms  the  word  was  adopted  by
the  Delawares,  Shawano,  and  other  northern  Algonquian  tribes  as  a  synonym  for
Cherokee,  probably  from  the  fact  that  the  Kituhwa  people  guarded  the  Cherokee
northern  frontier.  In  the  form  Cuttawa  it  appears  on  the  French  map  of  Vaugondy
in  1755.  From  a  similarity  of  spelling,  Schoolcraft  incorrectly  makes  it  a  synonym
for  Catawba,  while  Brinton  incorrectly  asserts  that  it  is  an  Algonquian  term,  fanci-
fully rendered,  ' '  inhabitants  of  the  great  wilderness. ' '  Among  the  western  Cherokee
it  is  now  the  name  of  a  powerful  secret  society,  which  had  its  origin  shortly  before  the
War  of  the  Rebellion.
Cherokee — This  name  occurs  in  fully  fifty  different  spellings.  In  the  standard  recog-
nized form,  which  dates  back  at  least  to  1708,  it  has  given  name  to  counties  in  North
Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Alabama,  within  the  ancient  territory  of  the
tribe,  and  to  as  many  as  twenty  other  geographic  locations  within  the  United  States.
In  the  Eastern  or  Lower  dialect,  with  which  the  English  settlers  first  became  famil-
iar, the  form  is  Tsa'ragl',  whence  we  get  Cherokee.  In  the  other  dialects  the  form
is  Tsa'lagK  It  is  evidently  foreign  to  the  tribe,  as  is  frequently  the  case  in  tribal
names,  and  in  all  probability  is  of  Choctaw  origin,  having  come  up  from  the  south
through  the  medium  of  the  Mobilian  trade  jargon.  It  will  be  noted  that  De  Soto,
whose  chroniclers  first  use  the  word,  in  the  form  Chalaque,  obtained  his  interpreters
from  the  Gulf  coast  of  Florida.  Fontanedo,  writing  about  the  year  1575,  mentions
other  inland  tribes  known  to  the  natives  of  Florida  under  names  which  seem  to  be
182


mooney]  TRIBAL    SYNONYMY  L83
of  Choctaw  origin;  For  instance,  the  Canogacole,  interpreted  "wicked  ] ■•  •< >j ■  I. •. " '  the
final  part  being  apparently  the  ( Ihoctaw  word  okla or  ogvla,  "people",  which  appears
also  in  Pascagoula,  Bayou  Goula,  and  Pensacola.  Shetimasha,  Atakapa,  and  probably
Biloxi,  are  also  Choctaw  names,  although  the  tribes  themselves  are  of  other  origins.
As  the  Choctaw  held  much  of  the  Gulf  coast  and  were  the  principal  traders  of  that
regi    it  was  natural  that  explorers  landing  among  them  should  adopt  their  names
for  the  more  remote  tribes.
The  name  seems  t"  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  tribe  occupied  a  rave  country.  In  the
"Choctaw  Leksikon "  of  Allen  Wright,  1880,  page  87,  we  find  ckolick,  a  noun,  signify-
ing a  hole,  cavity,  pit,  chasm,  etc.,  and  as  an  adjective  signifying  hollow,  fn  the  man-
uscript Choctaw  dictionary  of  Cyrus  Byington,  in  the  library  of  the  Bureau  of
American  Ethnology,  we  find  chiluk,  noun,  a  hole,  cavity,  hollow,  pit,  etc,  with  a
statement  that  in  its  usual  application  it  means  a  cavity  or  hollow,  and  not  a  hole
through  anything.  A.-  an  adjective,  the  same  form  is  given  as  signifying  hollow,
having  a  hole,  as  iii  chiluk,  a  hollow  tree:  aboha  chiluk,  an  empty  house;  chiluk
chukoa,  to  enter  a  hole.  Other  noun  forms  given  are  chulukund  achiluk  in  thesingu-
lar  and  chilukoa  in  the  plural,  all  signifying  hole,  pit,  or  cavity.  Verbal  tonus  are
chilukikbi,  to  make  a  hole,  and  chilukba,  to  open  and  form  a  fissure.
In  agreement  with  the  genius  of  the  Cherokee  language  tin-  root  form  of  the  tribal
name  takes  nominal  or  verbal  prefixes  according  to  its  connection  with  the  rest  of
the  sentence,  and  is  declined,  or  rather  conjugated,  as  follows:  Singular — first  per-
son. tsi-Tsa'l&ffl,  I  (am)  a  Cherokee:  second  person,  hi-Tsa'l&gl,  thou  art  a  Chero-
kee; third  person,  a-lia'Ulgi,  he  is  a  Cherokee.  Dual — first  person,  dsti-'Dsa'l&gl,
we  two  are  Cherokee;  second  person,  sli-Tsa'l&gt,  you  two  are  Cherokee;  third
person,  ani'-Tba'l&gi,  they  two  are  Cherokee.  Plural — first  person,  atsi-Taa/Vigl,
we  i  several  i  are  Cherokee;  second  person,  liiixi-Tsn'liii/i.  xt m  (several)  are  Chero-
kee; third  person,  anV- Tsa/l&ffi,  they  (several)  are  Cherokee.     It  will  be  noti   1
that  the  third  person  dual  and  plural  are  alike.
Oyata' ge'ronon' ,  etc. — The  [roquois  (.Mohawk  I  form  is  given  by  Hewitt  as  O-yata'-
ge'ronofi',  of  which  the  root  is  yala,  cave,  o  is  the  assertive  prefix,  ge  is  the  locative  at,
and  romotV  is  the  tribal  suffix,  equivalent  to  (  English  I  -to  or  people.  The  word,  which
has  several  dialectic  forms,  signifies  "inhabitants  of  the  cave  country,"  or  "cave-
country  people,"  rather  than  "people  who  dwell  in  caves,"  as  rendered  by  Schoolcraft The  same  radix  yata  occurs  also  in  the  Iroquois  name  for  the  opossum,  which  is  a
burrowing  animal.  As  is  well  known,  the  Allegheny  region  is  peculiarly  a  cave  coun-
try, the  caves  having  been  used  by  the  Indians  for  burial  and  shelter  purposes,  as  is
proved  by  numerous  remains  found  in  them.  It  is  probable  that  the  Iroquois  simply
translated  the  name  (Chalaque)  current  in  the  South,  as  we  find  is  the  case  in  the
West,  where  the  principal  plains  tribes  are  known  under  translations  of  the  same
names  in  all  the  different  languages.  The  Wyandot  name  for  the  Cherokee,
Wataiyo-ronon',  and  their  Catawba  name,  ManteraiV.  both  seem  to  refer  to  coming out  of  the  ground,  and  may  have  been  originally  intended  to  convey  the  same  idea
of  cave  ]   pie.
Rickahockan — This  name  is  used  by  the  German  explorer.  Lederer,  in  1670,  as  the
name  of  the  people  inhabiting  the  i  noun  tains  to  the  southwest  of  the  Virginia  settle-
ments. On  his  map  he  puts  them  in  the  mountains  on  the  southern  head  streams
of  Roanoke  river,  in  western  North  Carolina.  He  states  that,  according  to  his  Indian
informants,  the  Rickahockan  lived  beyond  the  mountains  in  a  land  of  great  waves,
which  he  interpreted  to  mean  the  sea  shore  i !  I,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  the  Indians
were  trying  to  convey,  by  means  of  the  sign  language,  the  idea  of  a  succession  of
mountain  ridges.  The  name  was  probably  of  Powhatan  origin,  and  is  evidently
identical  with  Rechahecrian  of  the  Virginia  chronicles  of  about  the  same  period,  the
/•  in  the  latter  form  being  perhaps  a  misprint.  It  may  he  connected  with  Righka-
hauk,  indicated  mi  Smith's  map  of  Virginia,  in  1607,  as  the  name  of  a  town  within  the


184  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Powhatan  territory,  and  still  preserved  in  Rockahock,  the  nameot  an  estate  on  lower
Pamunkey  river.  We  have  too  little  material  of  the  Powhatan  language  to  hazard
an  interpretation,  bui  it  may  possibly  contain  the  root  of  the  word  for  sand,  which
appears  as  lekawa,  nikawa,  negaw,  rigawa,  rekwa,  etc,  in  various  eastern  Algonquian
dialects,  whence  Rockaway  (sand),  and  Recgawawank  (sandy  place) .  The  Pow-
hatan form,  as  given  by  Strachey,  iaracawh  (sand).  H  e  gives  also  rocoyhook  (otter),
reihcahahcoik,  hidden  under  a  cloud,  overcast,  rirhthime  or  reilieoun  (a  comb),  and
rich  ii-h  (to  divide  in  halves).
TalligevA — As  Brinton  well  says:  "No  name  in  the  Lenape'  legends  has  given  rise  to
more  extensive  discussion  than  this."  On  Oolden's  map  in  his  "History  of  the  Five
Nations,"  1727,  we  find  the  "Alleghens"  indicated  upon  Allegheny  river.  Heckewel-
der,  who  recorded  the  Delaware  tradition  in  1819,  says:  "Those  people,  as  I  was  told,
calledthemselvesTalligeu  or  Talligewi.  Colonel  John  Gibson,  however,  agentleman
who  has  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Indians,  and  speaks  several  of  their  languages,
is  of  the  opinion  that  they  were  not  called  Talligewi,  but  Alligevvi;  and  it  would
seem  that  he  is  right  from  the  traces  of  their  name  which  still  remain  in  the  country,
the  Allegheny  river  and  mountains  having  indubitably  been  named  after  them.  The
Delawares  still  call  the  former  Alligewi  Sipu  (the  river  of  the  Alligewi)" — Indian
Nations,  p.  48,  ed.  1876.  Loskiel,  writing  on  the  authority  of  Zeisberger,  says  that
the  Delawares  knew  the  whole  country  drained  by  the  Ohio  under  the  name  of
Alligewinengk,  meaning  "the  land  in  which  they  arrived  from  distant  places, "  basing
his  interpretation  upon  an  etymology  compounded  from  talli  or  alii,  there,  icku,  to
that  place,  and  ewak,  they  go,  with  a  locative  final.  Ettwein,  another  Moravian
writer,  says  the  Delawares  called  "the  western  country"  Alligewenork,  meaning  a
warpath,  and  called  the  river  Alligewi  Sipo.  This  definition  would  make  the  word
come  from  palliton  or  attiton,  to  fight,  to  make  war,  ewak,  they  go,  and  a  locative,  i.  e.,
"they  go  there  to  fight."  Trumbull,  an  authority  on  Algonquian  languages,  derives
the  river  name  from  v<ulik,  good,  best,  hanne,  rapid  stream,  and  sipu,  river,  of  which
rendering  its  Iroquois  name,  Ohio,  is  nearly  an  equivalent.  Rafinesque  renders  Tal-
ligewi as  "there  found,"  from  talli,  there,  and  some  other  root,  not  given  (Brinton,
Walam  Olum,  pp.  229-230, 1885).
It  must  be  noted  that  the  names  Ohio  and  Alligewi  (or  Allegheny)  were  not
applied  by  the  Indians,  as  with  us,  to  different  parts  of  the  same  river,  but  to  the
whole  stream,  or  at  least  the  greater  portion  of  it  from  its  head  downward.  Although
Brinton  sees  no  necessary  connection  between  the  river  name  and  the  traditional
tribal  name,  the  statement  of  Heckewelder,  generally  a  competent  authority  on  Dela-
ware matters,  makes  them  identical.
In  the  traditional  tribal  name,  Talligewi  or  Alligewi,  wi  is  an  assertive  verbal  suf-
fix, so  that  the  form  properly  means  "  he  is  a  Tallige,"  or  "they  are  Tallige."  This
comes  very  near  to  Tsa'lagi',  the  name  by  which  the  Cherokee  call  themselves,  and
it  may  have  been  an  early  corruption  of  that  name.  In  Zeisberger' s  Delaware  dic-
tionary, however,  we  find  wuloh  or  walok,  signifying  a  cave  or  hole,  while  in  the
"Walam  Olum"  we  have  oligonunk  rendered  "at  the  place  of  caves,"  the  region
being  further  described  as  a  buffalo  land  on  a  pleasant  plain,  where  the  Lenape',
advancing  seaward  from  a  less  abundant  northern  region,  at  last  found  food  (Walam
Olum,  pp.  194-195).  Unfortunately,  like  other  aboriginal  productions  of  its  kind
among  the  northern  tribes,  the  Lenape  chronicle  is  suggestive  rather  than  complete
and  connected.  With  more  light  it  may  be  that  seeming  discrepancies  would  disap-
pear and  we  should  find  at  last  that  the  Cherokee,  in  ancient  times  as  in  the  historic
period,  were  always  the  southern  vanguard  of  the  Iroquoian  race,  always  primarily
a  mountain  people,  but  with  their  flank  resting  upon  the  Ohio  and  its  great  tribu-
taries, following  the  trend  of  the  Blue  ridge  and  the  Cumberland  as  they  slowly
gave  way  before  the  pressure  from  the  north  until  they  were  finally  cut  off  from  the
parent  stock  by  the  wedge  of  Algonquian  invasion,  but  always,  whether  in  the  north


TRIBAL   SYNONYM?  1  85
or  in  t  lie  south,  keeping  their  distinctive  title  among  the  tribes  as  the  "]   pie  of  the
cave  country."
As  the  Cherokee  have  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  history  for  so  long  a  period
their  name  appears  in  many  synonyms  and  diverse  spellings.  The  following  are
among  the  principal  of  these:
SYNONYMS
T~\  i  u.i'  (plural.  Ani'-Tsa'l&gl') .   Proper  form  in  the  Middle  and  Western  Cherokee dialects.
TSA   RAGl'.    Proper  form  in  the  Eastern  or  Lower  Cherokee  dialect.
Achalaque.  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  1847  (incorrectly  quoting  Garcilaso).
Chalakee.  Nuttall,  Travels,  124,  L821.
Chalaque.  Gentleman  of  Elvas,  1557;  Publications  of  Hakluyt  Society,  IX,  60,  1851.
/•■•■<.   Barcia,  Ensayo,  335, 1723.
Charakeys.   Homann  heirs'  map,about  17.">0. Charikees.  Document  of  1718,  ./Me  Rivers,  South  Carolina, 55, 1856.
Charokees.  Governor  Johnson,  1720,  fide  Rivers,  Early  History  South  Carolina,  93,
1874.
( 'heelah .   Barton,  New  Views,  xli v,  1 798.
Ckeerake.   Adair,  American  Indians,  226,  1775.
Cheerakee.  Ibid.,  137.
Cheerague's.  Moore,  1704,  in  Carroll,  Hist.  Colls.  South  Carolina,  n,  576,  1836.
i  'In f'/v./.v ,-.   Ross  I'.'i,  1776,  in  Historical  Magazine,  2d  series,  n,  218,  1867.
Chel-a-ke.  Long,  Expedition  to  Rocky  Mountains,  n,  lxx,  1823.
Chetakees.  Gallatin,  Trans.  Am.  Antiq.  Soc,  n,  90,  1836.
Chelaques.   Nuttall,  Travels,  247,  1821.
Chelekee.  Keane,  in  Stanford's  Compendium,  506,  1878. Chellokee.  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  n,  204,  1852.
Cheloculgee.  White,  Statistics  of  Georgia,  28,  RS49  (given  as  plural  form  of  Creek
name).
Chelokees.  Gallatin,  Trans.  Am.  Antiq.  Soc,  n,  104,  1836.
Cheokees.  Johnson,  1772,  in  New  York  Doc.  Col.  Hist.,  vm,  314,  1857  (misprint
for  Cherokees).
flu  raguees.  Coxe,  Carolina,  n,  1741.
Cherakees.  Ibid.,  map,  1741.
Clu  rnki.i.  Chanvignerie,  1736,  fide  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  in,  555,  1853.
Clu  raguees.  Coxe,  Carolana,  13,  1741.
Cheraguis.  Penicaut,  1699,  in  Margry,  v,  404,  1883.
Cherickees.  Clarke,  1739,  in  New  York  Doc.  Col.  Hist,  vi,  148,  1855.
Cherikee.  Albany  conference,  1742,  ibid.,  218.
Cherokee.  Governor  Johnson,  1708,  in  Rivers,  South  Carolina,  238,  1856.
Cherookees.  Croghan,  1760,  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Colls.,  4th  series,  ix,  372,  1871.
Cheroquees.  Campbell,  1761,  ibid.,  41'i.
Cherrackees.  Evans,  1755,  in  Gregg,  Old  Cheraws,  15,  1867.
Cherrokees.  Treaty  of  1722,  fide  Drake,  Book  of  Indians,  bk.  4,  32,  1848.
( 1i,  rrykees.  Weiser,  1748,  fide  Kauffman,  Western  Pennsylvania,  appendix,  18,  1851.
Chirakues.  Randolph,  1699,  in  Rivers,  South  Carolina,  449,  1856.
(  hirokys.  Writer  about  1825,  Annales  de  la  Prop,  de  la  Foi,  n,  384,  1841.
ChoraMs.  Document  of  1748,  New  York  Doc.  Col.  Hist.,  x,  143,  1858.
Chreokees.  Pike,  Travels,  173,  1811  (misprint,  transposed).
Shanaki.  Gatschet,  Caddo  MS,  Bureau  Am.  Ethn.,  1882  (Caddo  name).
Shan-nock.  Matey,  Red  River.  273,  1854  I  Wichita  name).
Shannaki.  Gatschet,  Fox  MS,   Bureau  Am.  Ethn.,  1882  (Fox  name:   plural   form,
Shannakiak).
Shayage.  Gatschet,  Raw  MS,  Bur.  Am.  Ethn.,  Is7s  i  Raw  name).


\  Rafinesque,  in  Marshall,  Kentucky,  i,  23,  1824. Zulocans.  I 186  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Sulluggoes.  Coxe,  Carolana,  22,  1741.
TcdUce.  Gatschet,  TonkawaMS,  Bur.  Am.  Ethn.,  1882  (Tonkawa  name,  ChaUke).
TceroUec.  Gatechet,  Wichita  Ms,  Bur.  Am.  Ethn.,  1882  (Wichita  name,  Cherokiih).
Tchatakei).  La  Salle,  L682,  in  Margry,  n,  1!<7,  1S77  (misprint).
TialaHes.  Gallatin,  Trans.  Am.  Antiq.  Soc.,  n,  90,  1836.
Tsallakee.  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  310,  1847.
Tsa-16-kee.  Morgan,  Ancient  Society,  113,  1878.
Tschirokesen.  Wrangell,  Ethn.  Nachrichten,  xni,  1839  (German  form).
TMlahM.  Grayson,  Creek  MS,  Bur.   Am.   Ethn.,   1885   (Creek  name;   plural  form,
Tstilgdl'gn  or  Tstdgtil'gi — Mooney).
Tzerrickey.  Urlsperger,  fide  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend,  i,  26,  1884.
Tzulukis.  Rafinesque,  Am.  Nations,  i,  123,  1836.
Znllli-illis.
Zulocans.
'  I  Heekewelder,  1819,  Indian  Nations,  48,  reprint  of  1876  (traditional  Dela-
allhtEwi.  >  ware  name.  singular,  Talliqe? or  AUigef  (see  preceding  explanation). Alligewi.    )
Alleg.  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  v,  133,  1855.
AUegans.  Colden,  map,  1727,  fide  Schoolcraft,  ibid.,  in,  525,  1853.
Allegeui.  Schoolcraft,  ibid.,  v,  133,  1855.
Alleghans.  Colden,  1727,  quoted  in  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  147,  1847.
Alleghanys.  Rafinesque,  in  Marshall,  Kentucky,  i,  34,  1824.
Alleghens.  Colden,  map,  1727,  fide  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  305,  1847.
Allegvri.  Squier,  in  Beach,  Indian  Miscellany,  26,  1877.
Alii.  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  v,  133,  1855.
Attighewis.  Keane,  in  Stanford's  Compendium,  500,  1878.
Talagans.  Rafinesque,  in  Marshall,  Kentucky,  i,  28,  1824.
Talega.  Brinton,  Walam  Olum,  201,  1885.
TaVagewy.  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  n,  36,  1852.
Tallegwi.  Rafinesque,  fide  Mercer,  Lenape  Stone,  90,  1885.
TaMgwee.  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  310,  1847.
Tallike.  Brinton,  Walam  Olum,  230,  1885.
Kiti-'hwagi  (plural,  Ani'-JCUu'hwagl.     See  preceding  explanation).
<  'uttawa.  Yaugondy,  map,  Partie  de  l'Amerique,  Septentrionale  1755. Gatohua.  l
Oattochwa.  \  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend,  i,  28,  1884.
Katowa  (plural,  Katowagi).  )
Ketawaugas.  Haywood,  Natural  and  Aboriginal  Tennessee,  233,  1823.
Kittuwa.  Brinton,  Walam  Olum,  16,  1885  ( Delaware  name) .
Kuttoowauw.  Aupaumut,  1791,  fide  Brinton,  ibid.,  16  (Mahican  name) .
Oyata'ge'honoS'.  Hewitt,  oral  information  (Iroquois  (Mohawk)  name.     See  preced-
ing explanation) .
Ojadagochroene.   Livingston,  1720,  in  New  York  Doc.  Col.  Hist.,  v,  567,  1855.
<hiihide<„,irns.    Bleeker,  1701,  ibid.,  iv,  918,  1854.
Oyadackuehramo.  Weiser,  1753,  ibid.,  vi,  795,  1855.
Oyadagahroenes.  Letter  of  1713,  ibid.,  v,  386,  1855  (incorrectly  stated  to  be  the  Flat-
heads,  i.  e.,  either  Catawbas  or  Choctaws) .
Oyadage'oho.  Gatechet,  Seneca  MS,  1882,  Bur.  Am.  Ethn.  (Seneca  name).
0-ya-da/-go-(H/io.  Morgan,  League  of  Iroquois,  337,  1851.
Oyaudah.  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  448,  1847  (Seneca  name) .
I'lrnlii'-i/o-ro'-no.  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend,  28,  1884  (Wyandot  name). Uyada.  Ibid.    (Seneca  name).
We-yau-dahi  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  253,  1847.
Wu-tai-yo-ro-nofl'\   Hewitt,  Wyandot  .Ms.  1893,  Bur.  Am.  Ethn.  (Wyandot  name).


mooney]  MOBILIAN    TRADE    LANGUAGE  187
Rickahockans.    Lederer,    1672,    Discoveries,   26,    rt-print    of    L891    (see    preceding
explanation  i.
Rickohockans.   Map.  ibid.
ariam.  Drake,   Book  of  Indians,  hook  4,  l'l\  1848  (from  old  Virginia  docu-
ments !.
crians.   Rafinesque,  in  Marshall,  Kentucky,  i,  36,  L824.
M'vs  i  ri. \\'.  Gatechet,  Catawba  Ms.  1881,   Bur.   Am.   Ethn.   (Catawba  name.     See
preceding  explanation  |.
„  rPotier,  Racines   Huronnea  et  Grammaire,   MS.  17.M  (Wyandot
names.       I  lie    first,    according    to     Hewitt,     is    equivalent     in
OCHIETARIKOSXOX.  .,  ,       °
l     "ndge,  or  mountain,  people    ).
T'kwe"-tah-e-i'-ha-nk.   Beauchamp,  in  Journal  Am.  Folklore,  v,  225,  1892  (given  as
the  t  taondaga  name  and  rendered,  "  people  of  a  beautiful  red  color"  |.
C     '■(,  viole(?).  Fontanedo,  about  1575,  Memoir,  translated  in  French  Hist.  Colls.,
ii,  2-i",  1875 (rendered  "wicked  people").
(2)  Mobilian  trade  LANGU  iGE  (page  16):  This  trade  jargon,  based  upon  Choctaw,
but  borrowing  also  from  all  the  neighboring  dialects  and  even  from  the  more  north-
ern Algonquian  languages,  was  spoken  and  understood  among  all  the  tribes  of  the  Gulf
states,  probably  as  far  west  as  Matagorda  bay  and  northward  along  both  hanks  of
the  Mississippi  to  the  Algonquian  frontier  about  the  entrance  of  the  Ohio.  It  was
called  Mobilienne  by  the  French,  from  Mobile,  the  great  trading  center  of  the  i  fulf
region.  Along  the  Mississippi  it  was  sometimes  known  also  as  the  Chickasaw  trade
language,  the  Chickasaw  being  a  dialect  of  the  Choctaw  language  proper.  Jeffreys,
in  1761,  compares  this  jargon  in  its  uses  to  the  lingua  franca  of  the  Levant,  and  it
wa.-  evidently  l>y  the  aid  of  this  intertribal  medium  that  I>e  Soto's  interpreter  from
Tampa  hay  could  converse  with  all  the  tribes  they  met  until  they  reached  the  Missis-
sippi. Some  of  the  names  used  hy  Fontanedo  about  1575  for  the  tribes  northward
from  Appalachee  bay  seem  to  be  derived  from  this  source,  as  in  later  times  were  the
names  of  the  other  tribes  of  the  Gulf  region,  without  regard  to  linguistic  affinities,
including  among  others  the  Taensa,  Tunica,  Atakapa,  and  Shetimasha,  representing
as  many  different  linguistic  stocks.  In  his  report  upon  the  southwestern  tribes  in
1805,  Sibley  says  that  the  "Mobilian"  was  spoken  in  addition  to  their  native  lan-
guages by  all  the  Indians  who  had  come  from  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi.
Among  those  so  using  it  lie  names  the  Alabama,  Apalachi,  Biloxi,  Chactoo,  Pacana,
Pascagula,  Taensa.  and  Tunica.  Woodward,  writing  from  Louisiana  more  than  fifty
years  later,  says:  '■There  is  yet  a  language  the  Texas  Indians  call  the  Mobilian
tongue,  that  ha.-  been  the  trading  language  of  almost  all  the  tribes  that  have  inhab-
ited the  country.  I  know  white  men  that  now  speak  it.  There  is  a  man  now  living
near  me  that  is  fifty  years  of  age,  raised  in  Texas,  that  speaks  the  language  well.  It
is  a  mixture  of  Creek,  Choctaw.  Chickasay,  Xetches  [Natchez],  and  Apelash  [Apa-
lachi]"— Reminiscences,  79.  For  further  information  see  also  Gatschet,  (reek
Migration  Legend,  and  Sibley,  Report.
The  Mobilian  trade  jargon  was  not  unique  of  its  kind.  In  America,  as  in  other
parts  Of  the  world,  the  common  necessities  of  intercommunication  have   resulted   in
the  format]   f  several  such  mongrel    dialects,   prevailing  sometimes   over   wide
area-.  In  some  cases,  also,  the  language  of  a  predominant  tribe  serves  as  the  com-
mon medium  for  all  the  tribes  of  a  particular  region.  In  South  America  we  find  the
lingoa  geral,  based  upon  the  Tupi'  language,  understood  tor  everyday  purposes  by
all  the  tribes  of  the  immense  central  region  from  Guiana  to  Paraguay,  including
almost  the  w  hole  Amazon  basin.  On  the  northwest  coast  w>  find  the  well-known
"Chinook  jargon,"  which  take>  it-  name  from  a  -mall  tribe  formerly  residing  at  the
mouth  of  the  Columbia,  in  common  use  among  all  tie-  tribes  iron.  California  far  up


MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE [ETH.  ANN.  19
into  Alaska,  and  eastward  to  the  great  divide  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  In  the
southwest  the  Navaho-Apache  language  is  understood  by  nearly  all  the  Indians  of
Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  whil   i  the  plains  the  Sioux  language  in  the  north  and
the  Comanche  in  the  south  hold  almost  the  same  position.  In  addition  to  these  we
have  also  the  noted  "sign  language,"  a  gesture  system  used  and  perfectly  understood
as  a  fluent  means  of  communication  among  all  the  hunting  tribes  of  the  plains  from
the  Saskatchewan  to  the  Rio  Grande.
(3)  Dialects  (page  17):  The  linguistic  affinity  of  the  Cherokee  and  northern
lroquoian  dialects,  although  now  well  established,  is  not  usually  obvious  on  the
surface,  but  requires  a  close  analysis  of  words,  with  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  pho-
netic changes,  to  make  it  appear.  The  superficial  agreement  is  perhaps  most  apparent
between  the  Mohawk  and  the  Eastern  (Lower)  Cherokee  dialects,  as  both  of  these
lack  the  labials  entirely  and  use  r  instead  of  /.  In  the  short  table  given  below  the
Iroquois  words  are  taken,  with  slight  changes  in  the  alphabet  used,  from  Hewitt's
manuscripts,  the  Cherokee  from  those  of  the  author:
Mohawk Cherokee  (East- ern)
person
ongwe' yufiwl fire
otsi'ra' atsi'ra  (atsi'la)
water
awen' awa'  (ami')
stone
onefiya' nimviV
arrow
ka'non'
kiuil' pipe kanonnawefi' kanun'nawu
hand  (arm)
owe'ya" uwa'yl
milk
unefi'ta" unuii'tl five wlsk hlskl
tobacco [tcarhu-,  Tuscarora] tsarfl  (tsalu)
fish
otcofi'ta' u'tsutl'
ghost o'skefma' asgi'na snake ennatuii
i'nadu'
Comparison  of  Cherokee  dialects
Eastern (Lower) Middle Western 1  Upper)
fire
atsi'ra atsi'la atsi'la water
awa'
ama' ama' dog
gi'rl'
gi'll' gi'll' hair
gitsu' gitsft'
gitlu' hawk
tsa'nuwa' IsVnmvn' tlft'nuwa' leech
tsanu'sl' tsanu'sl' tlanu'sl' bat
tsa'weha' tsa'meha' tla'meha'
panther tsuntu'tsl tsuntu'tsl ttuntu'tsl
jay
tsay'ku' tsay'ku' tlay'ku' martin  (bird)
tsutsu' tsutsn' tlutlti' war-club
atasu'
atasu' atasl' heart
unahu' unahu' unahwl' where?
ga'tsu ga'tsfl ha'tlu
how  much?
hufigu' hufigu' hila'gu key
stugi'stl stugi'stl stui'stl I  pick  it  up  (long)
tslnigi'il tslnigi'u tsine'ii my  father
agida'ta
agida'ta eda'ta my  mother
a'gitsl' a'gitsl'
etsl' my  father's  father
agini'sl agini'sl eni'sl my  mother's  father agidu'tti
agidu'td edu'tO


mooney]  IROQUOIAN    MIGRATIONS  189
It  will  be  noted  that  the  Eastern  and  Middle  dialects  arc  aboul  the  same,  except-
ing for  the  change  of  I  to  r,  and  the  entire  absence  of  the  labial  m  from  the  Eastern
dialect,  while  the  Western  differs  considerably  fr    the  others,  particularly  in  the
greater  frequency  of  the  liquid  J  and  the  softening  of  the  guttural  g,  the  changes  tend-
ing to  render  it  the  most  musical  of  all  the  Cherokee  dialects.  It  is  also  the  stand-
ard literary  dialect.  In  addition  to  these  three  principal  dialects  there  are  some
peculiar  forms  and  expressions  in  use  by  a  few  individuals  which  indicate  the  former
existence  of  cue  or  more  other  dialects  now  too  far  extinct  to  be  reconstructed.     As
in  most  other  tribes,  the  ceremonial  forms  used  by  the  priestl   I   ate  so  filled  with
archaic  and  figurative  expressions  as  to  !«■  almost  unintelligible  to  the  laity.
(4)  Iroquoian  nar.es  and  migrations  (p.  17):  The  Iroquoian  stock,  taking  its
name  from  the  celebrated  Iroquois  confederacy,  consisted  formerly  of  from  fifteen
to  twenty  tribes,  speaking  nearly  as  many  different  dialects,  and  including,  among
others,  the  following:
Wyandot,  or  Huron.  ~\ Tionontati,  or  Tobacco  nation.
Attiwan'daron,  or  Neutral  nation.  \  Ontario,  ( lanada. Tohotaenrat.
Wenrorono.
Mohawk.   |
Oneida.
Onondaga.  >  Iroquois,  or  Five  Nations,  New  York.
( layuga.
Seneca.        J
Erie.      Northern  t  Mhio,  etc.
Conestoga,  or  Susquehanna.     Southern  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland.
Nottoway.  "I
Meherrim'.J   S"»""'>'"  Virginia. Tnscarora.     Eastern  North  Carolina.
Cherokee.      Western  Carolina,  etc.
Tradition  and  history  alike  point  to  the  St.  Lawrence  region  as  the  early  home
of  this  stock.  Upon  this  point  all  authorities  concur.  Says  Hale,  in  his  paper  on
Indian  Migrations  (p.4):  "The  constant  tradition  of  the  Iroquois  represents  their
ancestors  a-  emigrants  from  the  region  north  of  the  Oreat  lakes,  where  they  dwelt  in
early  times  with  their  Huron  brethren.  This  tradition  is  recorded  with  much  par-
ticularity by  Cadwallader  Colden,  surveyor-general  of  New  York,  who  in  the  early
part  of  the  last  century  composed  his  well  known  'History  of  the  Five  Nations.'  It
is  told  in  a  somewhat  different  form  by  David  { 'tisick.  the  Tnscarora  historian,  in  his
'Sketchesof  Ancient  History  of  the  Six  .Nations,'  and  it  is  repeated  by  Mr.  L.  H.
Morgan  in  his  now  classical  work.  'The  League  of  the  Iroquois,'  for  which  he-  pro-
cured his  information  chiefly  among  the  Senecas.  Finally,  as  we  learn  from  the
narrative  of  the  Wyandot  Indian,  Peter  Clarke,  in  his  1   k  entitled  'Origin  ami  Tra-
ditional History  of  the  Wyandotts."  the  belief  of  the  Hurons  accords  in  this  respect
with  that  of  the  Iroquois.  Both  point  alike  to  the  country  immediately  north  of  the
St.  Lawrence,  and  especially  to  that  portion  of  it  lying  east  of  Lake  Ontario,  as  the
early  home  of  the  Huron-Iroquois  nations."  Nothing  is  known  of  the  tradition-  oi
the  ( lonestoga  or  the  Nottoway,  hut  the  trail  it  inn  of  the  Tnscarora.  as  given  by  Cusick
and  other  authorities,  makes  them  a  direct  offsl   (  from  the  northern  [roquois,  with
whom  they  afterward   reunited.     The  traditions  of  the  Cherokee  also,  as  we   have
seen,  bring  them  from  the  north,  thus   npleting  the  cycle.     "The  striking  fact  has
become  evident  that  the  course  of  migration  of  the  Huron-Cherokee  family  has  been
from  the  northeast  to  the  southwest — that  is.  from  eastern  Canada,  on  the  Lower  St.
Lawrence,  to  the  mountains  of  northern  Alabama. " — Hale,  Indian  Migrations,  p.  11.
The  retirement  of  the  northern  Iroquoian  tribes  from  the  St.  Lawrence  region  was


190  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [cth.ann.19
due  to  the  hostility  of  their  Algonquian  neighbors,  by  whom  the  Huronsand  their
allies  were  forced  to  take  refuge  about  Georgian  hay  and  the  head  of  Lake  Ontario,
while  the  Iroquois  proper  retreated  to  central  New  York.  In  1535  (artier  found  the
shores  of  the  river  from  Quebec  to  Montreal  occupied  by  anlroquoian  people,  but  on
the  settlement  of  the  country  seventy  years  later  the  same  region  was  found  in  pos-
session of  Algonquian  tribes.  The  confederation  of  the  five  Iroquois  nation-,  probably
about  the  year  1540,  enabled  them  to  check  the  Algonquian  invasion  and  to  assume
the  offensive.  Linguistic  and  other  evidence  shows  that  the  separation  of  the  Chero-
kee from  the  parent  stock  must  have  far  antedated  this  period.
(5)  Waaam  Ohm  (p.  18):  The  name  signifies  "red  score,"  from  the  Delaware
walam,  "painted,"  more  particularly  "painted  red."  and  <,hi,u.  "a  score,  tally-
mark."  The  Walam  Olum  was  first  published  in  1836  in  a  work  entitled  "The
American  Nations."  by  Constantine  Samuel  Rafinesque,  a  versatile  and  voluminous,
but  very  erratic,  French  scholar,  who  spent  the  latter  half  of  his  life  in  this  country,
dying  in  Philadelphia  in  1840.  He  asserted  that  it  was  a  translation  of  a  manuscript
hi  the  Delaware  language,  which  was  an  interpretation  of  an  ancient  sacred  metrical
legend  of  the  Delawares,  recorded  in  pictographa  cut  upon  wood,  obtained  in  1820  by
a  medical  friend  of  his  among  the  Delawares  then  living  in  central  Indiana.  He
says  himself:  "These  actual  olum  were  first  obtained  in  1820  as  a  reward  for  a
medical  cure,  deemed  a  curiosity,  and  were  unexplicable.  In  1822  were  obtained
from  another  individual  the  soul's  annexed  thereto  in  the  original  language,  hut  no
one  could  be  found  by  me  able  to  translate  them.  I  had  therefore  to  learn  the
language  since,  by  the  help  of  Zeisberger,  Heckewelder,  and  a  manuscript  diction-
ary, on  purpose  to  translate  them,  which  I  only  accomplished  in  1833."  On  account
of  the  unique  character  of  the  alleged  Indian  record  and  Rafinesque's  own  lack  of
standing  among  his  scientific  contemporaries,  hut  little  attention  was  paid  to  the
discovery  until  Brinton  took  up  the  subject  a  few  years  ago.  After  a  critical  sifting
of  the  evidence  from  every  point  of  view  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the
work  is  a  genuine  native  production,  although  the  manuscript  rendering  is  faulty.
partly  from  the  white  scribe's  ignorance  of  the  language  and  partly  from  the  Indian
narrator's  ignorance  of  the  meaning  of  the  archaic  forms.  Brinton's  edition  (q.  v. ),
published  from  Rafinesque's  manuscript,  gives  the  legend  in  triplicate  form — picto-
graph,  Delaware,  and  English  translation,  with  notes  and  glossary,  and  a  valuable
ethnologic  introduction  by  Brinton  himself.
It  is  not  known  that  any  of  the  original  woodcut  pictographs  of  the  Walam  Olum
arc  now  in  existence,  although  a  statement  of  Rafinesque  implies  that  he  had  seen
them.  As  evidence  of  the  truth  of  his  statement,  however,  we  have  the  fact  that
precisely  similar  pictographic  series  cut  upon  birch  bark,  each  pictograph  represent-
ing a  line  or  couplet  of  a  sacred  metrical  recitation,  are  now  known  to  be  common
among  the  Ojibwa,  Menomini,  and  other  northern  tribes.  In  1762  a  Delaware
prophet  recorded  his  visions  in  hieroglyphics  cut  upon  a  wooden  stick,  ami  about
the  year  1S'_>7  a  Kickapoo  reformer  adopted  the  same  method  to  propagate  a  w\\
religion  among  the  tribes.  One  of  these  "prayer  sticks"  is  now  in  the  National Museum,  being  all  that  remains  of  a  large  basketful  delivered  to  a  missionary  in
Indiana  by  a  party  of  Kickapoo  Indians  in  1830  (see  plate  and  description,  pp.  665,
697  et  seq.  in  the  author's  Ghost-dance  Religion,  Fourteenth  Annual  Report  of  the Bureau  of  Ethnology ).
(6)  Fish  riyek  (p.  18):  NamsesiSipu  I  Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations,  49),  or  Namas-
sipi  (Walam  olum,  p.l9S).  Deceived  by  a  slight  similarity  of  sound.  Heckewelder
makes  this  river  identical  with  the  Mississippi,  but  as  Schoolcraft  shows  (Notes on
Iroquois,  p.  316)  the  true  name  of  the  Mississippi  is  simply  Misi-sipi,  "great  river,"
and  "fish  river"  would  lie  a  most  inappropriate  name  for  such  a  turbulent  current,
where  only  the  coarser  species  can  live.  The  mere  fact  that  there  can  be  a  question
of  identity  among  experts  familiar  with  Indian  nomenclature  would  indicate  that  it


DK    soro's    ROUTE  191
was  Qot  one  of  the  larger  streams.  Although  Heckewelder  makes  the  Uligewi,  as  ne
prefers  to  call  them,  Bee  down  the  Mississippi  after  their  final  defeat,  the  Walam
Olum  chronicle  says  only  "all  the  Talega  go  south."  It  was  probahly  a  gradual
withdrawal,  rather  than  a  sudden  and  concerted  flight  (see  Hale,  Indian  Migra-
tions, pp. 19-22) .
(7)  First  ippeabance  of  whites  (p.  19):  ft  is  possible  that  this  may  refer  t   ■
of  the  earlier  adventurers  who  coasted  along  the  North  Atlantic  in  the  first  decades
after  the  discovery  of  America,  among  whom  were  Sebastian  Cabot,  in  1498;  Verra-
zano,  in  1">l'4;  and  Gomez,  in  1525.  As  these  voyages  were  not  followed  up  by  per- manent occupation  of  the  country  it  is  doubtful  if  they  made  any  lasting  impressii  m
upon  Indian  tradition.  The  author  lias  chosen  to  assume,  with  Brinton  and  Rati-
nesque,  that  the  Walam  Olum  reference  is  to  the  .settlement  of  the  Dutch  at  New
York  and  the  English  in  Virginia  sunn  after  1600.
(8)  1  > i  Soto's  route  (p.  26):  On  May  30,  1539,  Hernando  de  Soto,  of  Spain,  with
600  armed  men  and  213  horses,  landed  at  Tampa  hay,  on  the  west  coast  of  Florida,  in
search  of  gold.  Alter  more  than  four  year-  of  hardship  and  disappointed  wandering
from  Florida  to  the  great  plains  of  the  West  and  back  again  to  the  Mississippi,  where
De  Soto  died  and  his  body  was  consigned  to  the  great  river,  311  men,  all  that  were
left  of  the  expedition,  arrived  finally  at  Pdnuco,  in  Mexico,  on  September  in.  1543.
For  the  history  of  this  expedition,  the  most  important  ever  undertaken  by  Spain
within  eastern  United  State.-,  v.e  have  four  original  authorities.  First  is  the
brief,  hut  evidently  truthful  (Spanish)  report  of  Biedma,  an  officer  of  tin'  expedi-
tion, presented  to  the  King  in  1544.  immediately  after  the  return  to  Spain.  Next
in  order,  hut  of  first  importance  for  detail  and  general  appearance  of  reliability,  is
the  narrative  of  an  anonymous  Portuguese  cavalier  of  the  expedition,  commonly
known  as  the  i  lentleman  of  Elvas,  originally  published  in  the  Portuguese  language
in  1557.  Xext  comes  the  (Spanish)  narrative  of  Garcilaso,  written,  hut  not  pub-
lished, in  1587.  t'nlike  the  others,  the  author  was  not  an  eyewitness  of  what  lie describes,  hut  made  up  his  account  chiefly  from  the  oral  recollections  of  an  old
soldier  of  the  expedition  more  than  forty  years  after  the  event,  this  information
being  supplemented  from  papers  written  by  two  other  soldiers  of  De  Soto.  Is  might
he  expected,  the  ( iarcilaso  narrative,  although  written  in  flowery  style,  abounds  in
exaggeration  and  trivial  incident,  and  com]. ares  unfavorably  with  the  other  accounts,
while  probably  giving  more  of  the  minor  happenings.  The  fourth  original  account
is  an  unfinished  (Spanish)  report  by  Ranjel,  secretary  of  tin-  expedition,  written
-o  ,ii  after  reaching  Mexico,  and  afterward  incorporated  with  considerable  change  by
Oviedo,  in  his  "Historia  natural  j  general  de  las  Indias."  As  this  fourth  narrative
remained  unpublished  until  1851  and  has  never  been  translated,  it  has  hitherto  been
entirely  overlooked  by  the  commentators,  excepting  Winsor,  who  notes  it  inciden-
tally. In  general  it  agrees  well  with  the  Klvas  narrative  and  throws  valuable  light
upon  the  history  of  the  expedition.
The  principal  authorities,  while  preserving  a  general  unity  of  narrative,  differ
greatly  in  detail,  especially  in  estimates  of  numbers  and  distances,  frequentl}  to  such
an  extent  that  it  is  useless  to  attempt  to  reconcile  their  different  statements.  In  gen-
eral the  Gentleman  of  Klvas  is  most  moderate  in  his  expression,  while  Biedma  takes
a  middle  ground  and  Garcilaso  exaggerates  greatly.  Thus  the  first  named  gives
De  Soto  600  men.  Hied  ma  make-  the  number  620,  while  Garcilaso  says  1,000.  At  a
certain  stage  of  the  joumej  the  Portuguese  Gentleman  gives  De  Soto  Tun  Indian-  as
escort,  Biedma  say-  sou,  while  <  rarcilaso  makes  it  8,000  It  the  battle  of  Ma\  ilia  the
Klvas  account  gives  is  Spaniards  and  2,500  Indians  killed.  Biedmasays 20  Spaniards
killed,  without  giving  an  estimate  of  the  Indians,  while  Garcilaso  ha-  82  Spaniards
and  over  1  l.iioo  Indians  killed.  In  distances  there  is  as  great  discrepancy.  Thus
Biedma  makes  the  distance  from  ( luaxule  to  Chiaha  four  days,  Garcilaso  has  it  six
days,  and  Elvas  seven  days.     As  to  the  length  of  an  average  day's  march  we  find  it


192  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ash.19
estimated  all  the  way  from  "four  leagues,  more  or  less"  (<  rarcilaso  |  to  "  every  day
seven  or  eight  leagues"  (Elvas).  In  another  place  the  Elvas  chronicler  state-  thai
they  usually  made  five  or  six  leagues  a  day  through  inhabited  territories,  but  that  in
crossing  uninhabited  regions — as  that  between  Canasagua  and  Chiaha,  they  marched
every  day  as  far  as  possible  for  fear  of  running  out  of  provisions.  One  of  the  most
glaring  discrepancies  appears  in  regard  to  the  distance  between  Chiaha  and  Coste.
Both  the  Portuguese  writer  and  Garcilaso  put  Chiaha  upon  an  island — a  statement
which  in  itself  is  at  variance  with  any  present  conditions, — but  while  the  former
makes  the  island  a  fraction  over  a  league  in  length  the  latter  says  that  it  was  five
leagues  long.  The  next  town  was  Coste,  which  Garcilaso  puts  immediately  at  the
lower  end  of  the  same  island  while  the  Portuguese  Gentleman  represents  it  as  seven
days  distant,  although  he  himself  has  given  the  island  the  shorter  length.
Notwithstanding  a  deceptive  appearance  of  exactness,  especially  in  the  Elvas  and
Banjel  narratives,  which  have  the  form  of  a  daily  journal,  the  conclusion  is  irresist-
ible that  much  of  the  record  was  made  after  dates  had  been  forgotten,  and  the
sequence  of  events  had  become  confused.  Considering  all  the  difficulties,  dangers,
and  uncertainties  that  constantly  beset  the  expedition,  it  would  be  too  much  to  expect
the  regularity  of  a  ledger,  and  it  is  more  probable  that  the  entries  were  made,  not
from  day  to  day,  but  at  irregular  intervals  as  opportunity  presented  at  the  several
resting  places.  The  story  must  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  our  later  knowledge  of
the  geography  and  ethnology  of  the  country  traversed.
Each  of  the  three  principal  narratives  has  passed  through  translations  and  later
editions  of  more  or  less  doubtful  fidelity  to  the  original,  the  English  edition  in  some
cases  being  itself  a  translation  from  an  earlier  French  or  Dutch  translation.  English
speaking  historians  of  the  expedition  have  usually  drawn  their  material  from  one  or
the  other  of  these  translations,  without  knowledge  of  the  original  language,  of  the
etymologies  of  the  Indian  names  or  the  relations  of  the  various  tribes  mentioned,  or
of  the  general  system  of  Indian  geographic  nomenclature.  One  of  the  greatest  errors
has  been  the  attempl  to  give  in  every  case  a  fixed  local  habitation  to  a  name  which
in  some  instances  is  not  a  proper  name  at  all,  ami  in  others  is  merely  a  descriptive
term  or  a  duplicate  name  occurring  at  several  places  in  the  same  tribal  territory.
Thus  Tali  is  simply  the  Creek  word  talua,  town,  and  not  a  definite  place  name  as
represented  by  a  mistake  natural  in  dealing  through  interpreters  with  an  unknown
Indian  language.  Tallise  and  Tallimuchase  are  respectively  "Old  town"  and  "New
town"  in  Creek,  and  there  can  lie  no  certainty  that  the  same  names  were  applied  to
the  same  places  a  century  later.  Canasagua  is  a  corruption  of  a  Cherokee  name
which  occurs  in  at  least  three  other  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country  in  addition
to  the  one  mentioned  in  the  narrative,  and  almost  every  old  Indian  local  name
was  thus  repeated  several  times,  as  in  the  case  of  such  common  names  as  Short
creek,  Whitewater,  Richmond,  or  Lexington  among  ourselves.  The  fact  that  only
one  name  of  the  set  has  been  retained  on  the  map  does  not  prove  its  identity  with  the
town  of  the  old  chronicle.  Again  such  loose  terms  as  "a  large  river,"  "a  beautiful
valley,"  have  been  assumed  to  mean  something  more  definitely  localized  than  the wording  warrants.  The  most  common  error  in  translation  has  been  the  rendering
of  the  Spanish  "despoblado"  as  "desert."  There  are  no  deserts  in  the  Gulf  states,
and  the  word  means  simply  an  uninhabited  region,  usually  the  debatable  strip
between  two  tribes.
There  have  been  many  attempts  to  trace  lie  Soto's  route.  As  nearly  every  historian
who  lias  written  of  the  southern  states  lias  given  attention  to  this  subject  it  is
unnecessary  to  enumerate  them  all.  ( if  some  thirty  works  consulted  by  tin-  author,
in  addition  to  the  original  narratives  already  mentioned,  not  more  than  two  or  three
can  be  considered  as  speaking  with  any  authi  irity,  the  rest  simply  copying  from  these
without  investigation.  The  first  attempt  to  locate  the  route  definitely  was  made
by  Meek  (Romantic  Passages,  etc.)  in  1839  (reprinted  in  1857),  his  conclusions  being


■■<   i  i  DE    BOTO  S    ROUTE  1  93
based  upon  his  general  knowledge  of  the  geography  of  the  region.  In  is:>i  Picketl
tried  to  locate  ttic  route,  chiefly,  he  asserts,  from  [ndian  tradition  as  related  by
mixed-bloods.  How  much  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  [ndian  tradition  as  thus
interpreted  three  centuries  after  the  event  it  is  unnecessary  to  say.  Both  these
writers  have  brought  De  Soto  down  the  Coosa  river,  in  which  they  have  been
followed  without  investigation  by  Irvine.  Shea  and  others,  but  none  of  these  was
awan-  of  the  existence  of  a  Suwali  tribe  or  correctly  acquainted  with  the  Indian
nomenclature  of  the  upper  country,  or  of  the  Creek  country  as  so  well  summarized
bj  Gatschet  in  his  Creek  Migration  Legend.     They  are  also  mistaken  in  assuming
that  only  De  Soto  passed  through  thi   untry,  whereas  we  now  know  thai  several
Spanish  explorers  ami  numerous  French  adventurers  traversed  the  same  territory,
the  latest  expeditions  of  course  being  freshest  in  Indian  memory.  Jones  in  his
"De  Soto's  March  Through  Georgia"  simply  dresses  up  the-  earlier  statements  in
more  literary  style,  sometimes  changing  surmises  to  positive  assertions,  without
mentioning  his  authorities.  Maps  of  the  supposed  route,  all  bringing  De  Soto  down
the  ( loosa  instead  of  the  ( lhattahoochee,  have  been  published  in  [rving's  ( ionquest  of
Florida,  the  Hakluyt  Society's  edition  of  the  Gentleman  of  El va's  account,  and  in
Buckingham  Smith's  translation  of  the  same  narrative,  as  well  as  in  several  other
works.  For  the  eastern  portion,  with  which  we  have  to  deal,  all  of  these  arc  prac-
tically duplicates  of  one  another.  On  several  old  Spanish  and  French  maps  the
names  mentioned  in  the  narrative  seem  to  have  been  set  down  merely  to  till  space,
without  much  reference  to  the  text  of  the  chronicle.  For  a  list  and  notices  of  prin-
cipal writers  who  have  touched  upon  this  subject  see  the  appendix  to  Shea's  chapter
on  "Ancient  Florida"  in  Winsor's  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America,  n;  Bos-
ton, 1886.  We  shall  speak  only  of  that  part  of  the  route  which  lav  near  the  <  Iherokee
mountains.
The  first  location  which  concerns  us  in  the  narrative  is:  Cofitaehiqui,  the  town
from  which  De  Soto  set  out  for  the  Cherokee  country.  The  name  appears  variously
as  Cofitachequi  (Ranjel),  Cofitachique  (Biedma),  Cofachiqui  (Garcilaso),  Cutifa-
Chiqui  (by  transposition,  Elvas),  Cofetacque  (Vandera),  Catafachique  (Williams)
and  Cosatachiqui  (misprint,  Brooks  MSS),  and  the  Spaniards  first  heard  of  the
region  as  Yupaha  from  a  tribe  farther  to  the  south.  The  correct  form  appeals  to  lie
that  first  given,  which  Gatschet,  from  later  information  than  that  quoted  in  his
(feck   Migration  Legend,  makes  a   Hitchitee  word  about  equivalent  to  "Dogwood
town,"  fromco/i,  "dogw   1,"  coftta,  "dogwood  thicket,"  zndchiki,  "house,"  orcol-
lectively  "town."     McCulloch  puts  the  town  upon  the  headwaters  of  the  Ocmulgee; Williams  locates  it  on  the  Chattah   dice;  Gallatin  on  the  Oconc   r  the  Savannah;
Meek  and  Monette,  following  him,  probably  in  the  fork  of  the  Savannah  and  the
Broad;  1'ickett.  with  Jones  and  others  following  him.  at  Silver  bluff  on  the  east
i  north)  hank  of  the  Savannah,  in  Barnwell  county,  South  Carolina,  about  25  mile-  by
water  below  the  present  Augusta.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  at  the  very  outset  of  our
inquiry  the  commentators  differ  by  a  distance  equal  to  more  than  half  the  width  of
the  stat  i -of  ( Jeorgia.  It  will  suffice  here  to  say,  without  going  into  the  argument,  that,
the  author  is  inclined  to  believe  that  the  Indian  town  was  on  or  near  Silver  bluff,
which  was  noted  for  its  extensive  ancient  remains  as  far  back  as  Bartram's  time
(Travels.  313),  and  where  the  noted  George  Galphin  established  a  trading  post  in
1736.  The  original  site  has  since  been  almost  entirely  worn  away  by  the  river.
According  to  the  Indians  of  Cofitaehiqui,  the  town,  which  was  on  the  farther  i  north)
bank  of  the  stream,  was  tw  o  day's  journey  from  the  sea,  probably  by  canoe,  and  the
sailors  «  ith  the  expedition   believed  tin-  river  to  be  the  same  one  that  entered  al  St.
Helena,  which  was  a  very  close  guess.  The  Spaniards  were  shown  here  European
articles  which  they  were  told  had  been  obtained  from  white  men  who  had  entered  the
river's  mouth  many  years  before.  These  they  conjectured  to  have  been  the  men
with  Ayllon,  who  had  landed  on  that  coast  in  1520  and  again  in  1524.  The  town  was
probably  the  ancient  capital  of  the  I'.hee  Indians,  who,  before  their  absorption  by
!'.»    F.TH- 111   13


194  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  Creeks,  held  or  claimed  most  of  the  territory  on  both  banks  of  Savannah  river
from  the  Cherokee  border  t"  within  about  forty  miles  of  Savannah  ami  westward  to
the*  >geeeheeand  Cannouchee rivers  (see Gatschet,  ( Ireek  Migration  Legend,  i,  17-34).
The  country  was  already  on  the  decline  in  1540  from  a  recent  fatal  epidemic,  but
was  yet  populous  ami  wealthy,  and  was  ruled  by  a  woman  chief  whose  authority
extended  for  a  considerable  distance.  The  town  was  visited  also  by  Pardoin  1567  and
again  by  Torres  in  HiL's,  w  hen  it  was  still  a  principal  settlement,  as  rich  in  pearls  as  in
De  Soto's  time  i  Brooks  MSS,  in  the  archives  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology). Somewhere  in  southern  Georgia  De  Soto  had  been  told  of  a  rich  province  called
Coca  (Coosa,  the  Creek  country)  toward  the  northwest.  At  Cofltachiqui  he  again
heard  of  it  and  of  one  of  its  principal  towns  called  ( 'hiaha  ((  heliaw  )  as  being  twelve da\  s  inland.  Although  on  first  hearing  of  it  lie  had  kept  on  in  the  other  direction
in  order  to  reach  Cofltachiqui,  he  now  determined  to  go  there,  and  made  the
queen  a  prisoner  to  compel  her  to  accompany  him  a  part  of  the  way  as  guide.  ( 'oca
province  was.  though  he  did  not  know  it,  almost  due  west,  and  he  was  in  haste  to
reach  it  in  order  to  obtain  corn,  as  his  men  and  horses  were  almost  worn  out  from
hunger.  It  is  apparent,  however,  that  the  unwilling  queen,  afraid  of  being  carried
beyond  her  own  territories,  led  the  Spaniards  by  a  roundabout  route  in  the  hope  of
making  her  escape,  as  she  finally  did,  or  perhaps  of  leaving  them  to  starve  and  die  in
the  mountains,  precisely  the  trick  attempted  by  the  Indians  upon  another  Spanish
adventurer,  Coronado,  entering  the  great  plains  from  the  Pacific  coast  in  search  of
golden  treasure  in  the  .same  year.
Instead  therefore  of  recrossing  the  river  to  the  westward,  the  Spaniards,  guided
by  the  captive  queen,  took  the  direction  of  the  north  ("la  vuelta  del  norte" —
Biedma),  and,  after  passing  through  several  towns  subject  to  the  queen,  came  in
seven  days  to  "the province  of  Chalaque"  (Elvas).  Elvas,  Garcilaso,  and  Ranjel
agree  upon  the  spelling,  but  the  last  named  makes  the  distance  only  two  days  from
Cofltachiqui.  Biedma  does  not  mention  the  country  at  all.  .  The  trifling  difference
in  statement  of  live  days  in  seven  need  not  trouble  us,  as  Biedma  makes  the  whole
distance  from  Cofltachiqui  to  Xuala  eight  days,  and  from  Guaxuleto  Chiaha  four  days,
where  Elvas  makes  it,  respectively,  twelve  and  seven  days.  Chalaque  is,  of  course,
Cherokee,  as  all  writers  agree,  and  De  Soto  was  now  probably  on  the  waters  of
Keowee  river,  the  eastern  head  stream  of  Savannah  river,  where  the  Lower  Chero-
kee had  their  towns.     Finding  the  country  bare  of  corn,  he  made  no  stay.
Proceeding  six  days  farther  they  came  next  to  Guaquili,  where  they  were  kindly
received.  This  name  occurs  only  in  the  Ranjel  narrative,  the  other  three  being
entirely  silent  in  regard  to  such  a  halting  place.  The  name  has  a  Cherokee  sound
(Wakili),  but  if  we  allow  for  a  dialectic  substitution  of  /  for  r  it  may  be  connected
with  such  Catawba  names  as  Congaree,  Wateree,  and  Sugeree.  It  was  probably  a
village  of  minor  importance.
They  came  next  to  the  province  of  Xuala,  or  Xualla,  as  the  Divas  narrative  more
often  has  it.  In  a  French  edition  it  appears  as  Chouala.  Ranjel  makes  it  three
days  from  Guaquili  or  five  from  Chalaque.  Elvas  also  makes  it  live  days  from
Chalaque,  while  Biedma  makes  it  eight  days  from  Cofltachiqui,  a  total  discrepancy
of  four  days  from  the  last-named  place.  Biedma  describes  it  as  a  rough  mountain
country,  thinly  populated,  but  with  a  few  Indian  houses,  and  thinks  that  in  these
mountains  the  great  river  of  Fspiritu  Santo  (the  Mississippi)  had  its  birth.  Ranjel
describes  the  town  as  situated  in  a  plain  in  the  vicinity  of  rivers  and  in  a  country
with  greater  appearance  of  gold  mines  than  any  they  had  yet  seen.  The  Portuguese
gentleman  describes  it  as  having  very  little  corn,  and  says  that  they  reached  it  from
Cofltachiqui  over  a  hilly  country.  In  his  final  chapter  he  states  that  the  course
from  Cofltachiqui  to  this  place  was  from  south  to  north,  thus  agreeing  with  Biedma.
According  to  Garcilaso  (pp.  136-137)  it  was  fifty  leagues  by  the  road  along  which  the
Spaniards  had  come  from  Cofltachiqui  to  the  first  valley  of  the  province  of  Xuala,


moosey]  .         dk    SOTO'S    ROUTE  I  ".r>
with  but  few  mountains  on  the  way,  ami  the  town  itself  was  situated  close  under  a
mi  mil  tain  ( "  a  la  tali  la  de  una  sierra  "  beside  a  small  bul  rapid  stream  which  formed the  boundary  of  the  territory  of  Cofitachiqui  in  this  direction.  From  Ranjel  we
learn  that  on  the  same  day  after  leaving  this  place  for  the  nexl  "province"  the
Spaniards  crossed  a  very  hi^l   untain  ridge  ("una  sierra  tnuy  alta"
Without  mentioning  the  name,  Pickett  >  1851  refers  to  Kuala  as  "a  town  in  the
present  Habersham  county,  Georgia,"  but  gives  no  reason  for  this  opinion.  Rye
and  Irving,  of  the  same  date,  arguing  from  a  slight  similarity  of  name,  think  it  may
have  been  on  the  site  of  a  fun  hit  Cherokee  town,  Qualatchee,  on  the  head  of  Chat-
tahoochee river  in  Georgia.     The  resemblance,  however,  is  rather  farfetched,  and
moreover  this  same  name  is  found  on   Keowee  river   in  South  Carolina.    .1   s
i  De  Soto  in  <  reorgia,  1880)  interprets  '  rarcilaso's  description  to  refer  to  "  Sai   :hee
valley.  Habersham  county"  which  should  be  White  county— and  the  neighboring
Mount  yonah,  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  same  description  of  mountain,  valley,
and  swift  flowing  stream  might  apply  equally  well  to  any  one  of  twenty  other
localities  in  this  southern  mountain  country.  With  direct  contradiction  Garcilaso
says  that  the  Spaniards  rested  here  fifteen  days  because  they  found  provisions  plenti-
ful, while  the  Portuguese  Gentleman  says  that  they  stopped  but  two  days  because
they  found  so  little  corn!  Ranjel  makes  them  stop  four  days  and  says  they  found
abundant  provisions  and  assistance.
However  that  maj  have  been,  there  can  lie  no  question  of  tin-  identity  of  the
name.  As  the  province  of  Chalaque  is  the  country  of  the  Cherokee,  so  the  province
of  Xuala  is  the  territory  of  the  Suwali  or  Sara  Indians,  better  known  later  as
Cheraw,  who  lived  in  early  times  in  the  piedmont  country  about  the  head  of  Broad
river  in  North  Carolina,  adjoining  the  Cherokee,  who  still  remember  them  under
the  name  of  Ani'-Suwa'li.  A  principal  trail  to  their  country  from  the  west  led  up
Swannanoa  river  ami  across  the  gap  which,  fur  this  reason,  was  kmiwn  to  the
( Jherokee  as  Suwa'li-nunna,  "  Suwali  trail,"  corrupted  by  the  whites  to  Swannanoa.
Leilerer.  who  found  them  in  the  same  general  region  in  1670,  calls  this  gap  the
"Suala  pass"  ami  the  neighboring  mountains  the  Sara  mountains,  "which,"  lie
says,  "The  Spaniards  make  Simla."  They  afterward  shifted  to  the  mirth  and
finally  returned  ami  were  incorporated  with  the  Catawba  (see  Mooney,  Simian  Tribes
•  if  the  East,  bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1894).
Up  to  this  point  the  Spaniards  had  followed  a  mirth  course  from  Cofitachiqui
(Biedma  ami  Elvas),  but  they  now  turned  to  the  west  i  Elvas,  final  chapter).  On
the  same  day  on  which  they  left  Xnala  they  crossed  "a  very  high  mountain  ridge,"
and  descended  the  next  day  to  a  wide  meadow  bottom  I  "savana"  I,  through  which
Qowed  a  river  which  they  concluded  was  a  part  of  the  Espiritu  Santo,  the  Mississippi
(Ranjel).  Biedma  speaks  of  crossing  a  mountain  country  ami  mentions  the  river,
which  he  also  says  they  thought  to  he  a  tributary  of  the  Mississippi.  ( ianilasu
Bays  that  this  portion  of  their  mute  was  through  a  mountain  country  without  inhabi-
tants i  "desp.  ihladn"  i  ami  the  I'.  .it  iiL'iioe  gentleman  describes  it  as  being  over  "  very
rough  ami  high  ridges."  In  live  days  of  such  travel — fur  here,  for  a  wonder,  all  the
narratives  agree — they  ram.-  to  Guaxule.  This  is  the  form  given  by  Garcilaso  and
the  Gentleman  of  Elvas;  Biedma  has  Guasula,  and  Ranjel  Guasili  or  Guasuli.  The
translators  am!  commentators  have  given  its  such  forms  as  Guachoule,  Quaxule,
Quaxulla,  and  Quexale.  According  to  the  Spanish  method  of  writing  Indian  words
the  name  was  pronounced  Washule'  or  W'asuli,  which  has  a  Cherokee  sound,  although
it  can  not  he  translated.  Buckingham  Smith  I  Narratives,  p.  222  I  hints  that  the  Span-
iards may  have  changed  (oiasili  to  Guasule,  because  of  the  similarity  of  tin-  latter
form  to  a  town  name  in  southern  Spain.  Smh  corruptions  of  Indian  name  arc  of
frequent  occurrence.  <  rarcilaso  speaks  of  it  as  a  "  province  and  town,"  while  Biedma
ami  Ranjel  call  it  simply  a  town  ("pueblo").  Before  reaching  this  place  the  Indian
queen  had  managed  to  make  her  escape.     All  the  chroniclers  tell  of  the  kind  recep-


196  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
tion  which  the  Spaniards  met  here,  hut  th<'  only  description  of  the  town  itself  is  from
Garcilaso,  who  says  that  it  was  situated  in  the  midst  of  many  small  streams  which
came  down  from  the  mountains  round  about,  that  it  consisted  of  three  hundred
houses,  which  is  probably  an  exaggeration,  though  it  goes  to  show  that  the  village
was  of  considerable  size,  and  that  the  chief's  house,  in  which  the  principal  officers
were  lodged,  was  upon  a  high  hill  (  "un  cerro  alto"  ),  around  which  was  a  roadway
( " paseadero' ' )  wide  enough  for  six  men  to  walk  abreast.  By  the  "chief's  house"
we  are  to  understand  the  town-house,  while  from  various  similar  references  in  other
parts  of  the  narrative  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "hill"  upon  which  it  stood  was
an  artificial  mound.  In  modern  Spanish  writing  such  artificial  elevations  are  more
often  called  lomas,  but  these  early  adventurers  may  be  excused  for  not  noting  the
distinction.  Issuing  from  the  mountains  round  about  the  town  were  numerous  small
streams,  which  united  to  form  the  river  which  the  Spaniards  henceforth  followed
from  here  down  to  Chiaha,  where  it  was  as  large  as  the  Guadalquivir  at  Sevilla
( ( larcilaso).
Deceived  by  the  occurrence,  in  the  Portuguese  narrative,  of  the  name  Canasagua,
which  they  assumed  could  belong  in  but  one  place,  earlier  commentators  have
identified  this  river  with  the  Coosa,  Pickett  putting  Guaxule  somewhere  upon  its
upper  waters,  while  Jones  improves  upon  this  by  making  the  site  "identical,  or  very
nearly  so,  with  Coosawattee  Old  town,  in  the  southeastern  corner  of  Murray  county,"
Georgia.  As  we  shall  show,  however,  the  name  in  question  was  duplicated  in  several
states,  and  a  careful  study  of  the  narratives,  in  the  light  of  present  knowledge  of  the
country,  makes  it  evident  that  the  river  was  not  the  Coosa,  but  the  Chattahoochee.
Turning  our  attention  once  more  to  Xuala,  the  most  northern  point  reached  by
De  Soto,  we  have  seen  that  this  was  the  territory  of  the  Suwala  or  Sara  Indians,  in
the  eastern  foothills  of  the  Alleghenies,  about  the  head  waters  of  Broad  and  Catawha
rivers,  in  North  Carolina.  As  the  Spaniards  turned  here  to  the  west  they  probably
did  not  penetrate  far  beyond  the  present  South  Carolina  boundary.  The  "very  high
mountain  ridge"  which  they  crossed  immediately  after  leaving  the  town  was  in  all
probability  the  main  chain  of  the  Blue  ridge,  while  the  river  which  they  found  after
descending  to  the  savanna  on  the  other  side,  and  which  they  guessed  to  be  a  branch
of  the  Mississippi,  was  almost  as  certainly  the  upper  part  of  the  French  Broad,  the
first  stream  flowing  in  an  opposite  direction  from  those  which  they  had  previously
encountered.  They  may  have  struck  it  in  the  neighborhood  of  Hendersonville  or
Brevard,  there  being  two  gaps,  passable  for  vehicles,  in  the  main  ridge  eastward
from  the  first-named  town.  The  uninhabited  mountains  through  which  they  strug-
gled for  several  days  on  their  way  to  Chiaha  and  Coca  (the  Creek  country)  in  the
southwest  were  the  broken  ridges  in  which  the  Savannah  and  the  Little  Tennessee
have  their  sources,  and  if  they  followed  an  Indian  trail  they  may  have  passed  through
the  Rabun  gap,  near  the  present  Clayton,  Georgia.  Guaxule,  and  hot  Xuala,  as  Jones
supposes,  was  in  Nacoochee  valley,  in  the  present  White  county,  Georgia,  and  the
small  streams  which  united  to  form  the  river  down  which  the  Spaniards  proceeded
to  Chiaha  were  the  headwaters  of  the  Chattahoochee.  The  hill  upon  which  the
townhouse  was  built  must  have  been  the  great  Nacoochee  mound,  the  most  promi-
nent landmark  in  the  valley,  on  the  east  bank  of  Sautee  creek,  in  White  county,
about  twelve  miles  northwest  of  Clarkesville.  This  is  the  largest  mound  in  upper
Georgia,  with  the  exception  of  the  noted  Etowah  mound  near  Cartersville,  and  is  the
'only  one  which  can  fill  the  requirements  of  the  case.  There  are  but  two  consider-
able mounds  in  western  North  Carolina,  that  at  Franklin  and  a  smaller  one  on  Oeona-
luftee  river,  on  the  present  East  Cherokee  reservation,  and  as  both  of  these  are  on
streams  flowing  away  from  the  Creek  country,  this  fact  alone  would  bar  them  from
consideration.  The  only  large  mounds  in  upper  Georgia  are  this  one  at  Nacoochee
and  the  group  on  the  Etowah  river,  near  Cartersville.  The  largest  of  the  Etowah
group  is  some  fifty  feet  in  height  and  is  ascended  on  one  side  by  means  of  a  roadway


MOONKY]
DE   SOTO'S    EOUTE  197
about  fifty  feet  wide  at  the  base  and  narrowing  gradually  to  the  top.  Had  this  been
the  mound  of  the  narrative  it  is  hardly  possible  that  the  chronicler  would  have  failed
to  notice  also  the  two  other  mounds  of  the  group  or  the  other  one  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  river,  each  of  these  being  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  feet  in  height,  to  say
nothing  of  the  great  ditch  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length  which  encircles  the  group.
Moreover,  Cartersville  is  at  some  distance  from  the  mountains,  and  the  Etowah  river
at  this  point  does  not  answer  the  description  of  a  small  rushing  mountain  stream.
There   is   no   considerable   mound   at    Coosawatee  or   in  any  of    the  thre<   unties
adj.  lining.
The  Nacoochee  mound  has  been  cleared  and  cultivated  for  many  years  ami  ih.es
not  now  show  any  appearance  of  a  roadway  up  the  Bide,  but  from  its  great  height
We  may  he  reasonably  sure  that  some  such  means  of  easy  ascent  existed  in  ancient
times.  In  other  respects  it  is  the  only  mound  in  the  whole  upper  country  which
tills  the  conditions.  The  valley  is  one  of  the  most  fertile  spots  in  Georgia  and
numerous  ancient  remains  give  evidence  that  it  was  a  favorite  center  of  settlement  in
early  days.  At  the  beginning  of  the  modern  historic  period  it  was  held  by  the
Cherokee,  who  had  there  a  town  called  Nacoochee,  but  their  claim  was  disputed  by
the  Creeks.  The  Gentleman  of  Elvas  states  that  Guaxule  was  subject  to  the  queen
of  Cofitachiqui,  but  this  may  mean  only  that  the  people  of  the  two  towns  or  trihes
were  in  friendly  alliance.  The  modern  name  is  pronounced  Nagutil'  by  the  <  Ihero-
kee,  who  say.  however,  that  it  is  not  of  their  language.  The  terminal  may  Ik-  the
Creek  udshi,  "small."  or  it  may  have  a  connection  with  the  name  of  the  Tehee Indians.
From  Guaxule  the  Spaniards  advanced  toCanasoga  (Ranjel)  orCanasagua  I  Elvas  I,
one  or  two  days'  march  from  Guaxule,  according  to  one  or  the  other  authority.
Garcilaso  and  Biedma  do  not  mention  the  name.  As  Garcilaso  states  that  from
Guaxule  to  Chiaha  the  march  was  down  the  bank  of  the  same  river,  which  we
identify  with  the  Chattahoochee,  the  town  may  have  been  in  the  neighborhood  of
the  present  Gainesville.  As  we  have  seen,  however,  it  is  unsafe  to  trust  the  estimates
of  distance.  Arguing  from  the  name,  Meek  infers  that  the  town  was  about  Cona-
sauga  river  in  Murray  county,  and  that  the  river  down  which  they  inarched  to  reach
it  was  "no  doubt  the  Etowah,"  although  to  reach  the  first  named  river  from  the
Etowah  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  another  sharp  turn  to  the  north.  From  the
same  coincidence  Pickett  puts  it  on  the  Conasauga,  "in  the  modern  county  of  Mur-
rav.  Georgia,"  while  Jones,  on  the  same  theory,  locates  it  "  at  or  near  the  junction
of  the  Connasauga  and  Coosawattee  rivers,  in  originally  Cass,  now  Gordon  county."
Here  his  modern  geography  as  well  as  his  ancient  is  at  fault,  as  the  original  Cass
county  is  now  Bartow,  the  name  having  been  changed  in  consequence  of  a  local  dis-
like for  General  Cass.  The  whole  theory  of  a  march  down  the  Coosa  river  rests
upon  this  coincidence  of  the  name.  The  same  name  however,  pronounced  G&nsd'ffl
by  the  Cherokee,  was  applied  by  them  to  at  least  three  different  locations  within
their  old  territory,  while  the  one  mentioned  in  the  narrative  would  make  the  fourth.
The  others  were  (1)  on  Oostanaula river,  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Conasauga.  where
afterward  was  New  Echota,  in  Cordon  county,  Georgia;  (2)  on  Canasauga  creek,  m
McMinn  county,  Tennessee;  (3)  on  Tuckasegee  river,  about  two  miles  above  Web-
ster, in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.  At  each  of  these  places  are  remains  of
ancient  settlement.  It  is  possible  that  the  name  of  Kenesaw  mountain,  near  .Mari-
etta, in  Cobb  county,  <  reorgia,  may  be  a  corruption  of  GansagI,  and  if  so,  theCanasagua
of  the  narrative  may  have  been  somewhere  in  this  vicinity  on  the  Chattahoochee.
The  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.
On  leaving  Canasagua  they  continued  down  the  same  river  which  they  had  fol-
lowed from  Cuaxule  (Garcilaso  I,  and  after  traveling  several  days  through  an  unin-
habited (  "despoblado"  ,)  country  I  HI  vast  arrived  at  Chiaha.  which  was  subject  to  the
great  chief  of  Coca  (Elvasj .     The  name  is  spelled  Chiaha  by  Ranjel  and  the  <  tenth-


198  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  Leth.ann.19
man  of  Elvas,  Chiha  by  Biedma  in  the  Documentos,  China  by  a  misprint  in  an
English  rendering,  and  Ychiaha  byGarcilaso.  It  appears  as  Chiha  on  an  English  map
of  17iii'  reproduced  in  Winsor,  Westward  Movement,  page  31,  1897.  Gallatin  spells
it  Ichiaha,  while  Williams  and  Fairbanks,  by  misprint,  make  it  Chiapa.  According
t < <  both  Ranjel  and  Elvas  the  army  entered  it  on  the  5th  of  June,  although  the
former  makes  it  tour  days  from  Canasagua,  while  the  other  makes  it  five.  Biedma
says  it  was  four  days  from  Guaxule,  and,  finally,  Garcilaso  says  it  was  six  days  and
thirty  leagues  from  Guaxule  and  on  the  same  river,  which  was,  here  at  Chiaha,  as
large  as  the  Guadalquivir  at  Sevilla.  As  we  have  seen,  there  is  a  great  discrepancy
in  the  statements  of  the  distance  from  ( lofitachiqui  to  this  point.  All  four  authorities
agree  that  the  town  was  on  an  island  in  the  river,  along  which  they  had  been
marchingfor  some  time  (Garcilaso,  Ranjel),  but  while  the  Elvas  narrative  makes
the  island  "two  crossbow  shot"  in  length  above  the  town  and  one  league  in  length
below  it,  Garcilaso  calls  it  a  "great  island  more  than  five  leagues  long."  On  both
sides  of  the  island  the  stream  was  very  broad  and  easily  waded  (Elvas).  Finding
welcome  and  food  for  men  and  horses  the  Spaniards  rested  here  nearly  a  month
(June  5-28,  Ranjel;  twenty-six  or  twenty-seven  days,  Biedma;  thirty  days,  Elvas).
In  spite  of  the  danger  from  attack  De  Soto  allowed  his  men  to  sleep  under  trees  in
the  open  air,  "because  it  was  very  hot  and  the  people  should  have  suffered  great
extremity  if  it  had  not  been  so"  ( Elvas).  This  in  itself  is  evidence  that  the  place
was  pretty  far  to  the  south,  as  it  was  yet  only  the  first  week  in  June.  The, town  was
subject  to  the  chief  of  the  great  province  of  Coca,  farther  to  the  west.  From  here
onward  they  began  to  meet  palisaded  towns.
On  the  theory  that  the  march  was  down  Coosa  river,  every  commentator  hitherto
has  located  Chiaha  at  some  point  upon  this  stream,  either  in  Alabama  or  Georgia.
Gallatin  (1836)  says  that  it  "must  have  been  on  the  Coosa,  probably  some  distance
below  tin-  site  of  New  Echota."  He  notesa  similarity  of  sound  between  Ichiaha  and
"Echoy."  (Itseyl),  a  Cherokee  town  name.  Williams  (1837)  says  that  it  was  on
Mobile  (i.  e.,  the  Alabama  or  lower  Coosa  river).  Meek  (1839)  says  "there  can  be
little  doubt  that  Chiaha  was  situated  but  a  short  distance  above  the  junction  of  the
Coosa  and  Chattooga  rivers,"  i.  e.,  not  far  within  the  Alabama  line.  He  notes  the
occurrence  of  a  "Chiaha"  (Chehawhaw)  creek  near  Talladega,  Alabama.  In  regard
to  the  island  upon  which  the  town  was  said  to  have  been  situated  he  says:  "There
is  no  such  island  now  in  the  Coosa.  It  is  probable  that  the  Spaniards  either  mistook
the  peninsula  formed  by  the  junction  of  two  rivers,  the  Coosa  and  Chattooga,  for  an
island,  or  that  those  two  rivers  were  originally  united  so  as  to  form  an  island  near
their  present  confluence.  We  have  heard  this  latter  supposition  asserted  by  per-
sons well  acquainted  with  the  country." — Romantic  Passages,  p.  222, 1857.  Monette
(1846)  puts  it  on  Etowah  branch  of  the  Coosa,  probably  in  Floyd  county,  Georgia.
Pickett  (1851),  followed  in  turn  by  Irving,  Jones,  and  Shea,  locates  it  at  "the  site  of
the  modern  Rome."  The  "island"  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  space  between  the two  streams  above  the  continence.
Pickett,  as  has  been  stated,  bases  his  statements  chiefly  or  entirely  upon  Indian
traditions  as  obtained  from  halfbreeds  or  traders.  How  much  information  can  be
gathered  from  such  sources  in  regard  to  events  that  transpired  three  centuries  before
may  lie  estimated  by  considering  how  much  an  illiterate  mountaineer  of  the  same
region  might  lie  able  to  tell  concerning  the  founding  of  the  Georgia  colony.  Pickett
himself  seems  to  have  been  entirely  unaware  of  the  later  Spanish  expeditions  of
Pardo  and  De  Luna  through  the  same  country,  as  he  makes  no  mention  of  them
in  his  history  of  Alabama,  but  ascribes  everything  to  De  Soto.  Concerning  Chiaha
he  says:
"The  most  ancient  Cherokee  Indians,  whose  tradition  has  been  handed  down  to
us  through  old  Indian  trailers,  disagree  as  to  the  precise  place  [!]  where  De  Soto
crossed  the  Oostanaula  to  get  over  into  the  town  of  Chiaha— some  asserting  that  he


]>K    SOTO'S    ROUTE  199
passed  over  that  river  seven  miles  above  its  junction  with  tin-  Etowah,  and  that
he  marched  from  thence  down  t"  Chiaha,  which,  all  contend,  lay  immediately  ;it  the
confluence  of  the  two  rivers;  while  other  ancient  Indians  asserted  thai  lie  crossed,
with  his  army,  immediately  opposite  i In-  town.  Bu(  this  is  no(  verj  important.
Coupling  the  Indian  traditions  with  theaccounl  by  <  larcellasso  and  thai  by  the  Por-
tuguese rvi'H  itness,  we  are  inclined  to  believe  the  hitter  traditi  m  thai  the  expedition
continued  to  advance  down  the  western  side  of  the  Oostanaula  until  thej  halted  in
view  of  the  mouth  of  the  Etowah.  De  Soto,  having  arrived  immediately  opposite
the  great  town  of  Chiaha,  uo\i  the  site  of  Rome,  crossed  the  Oostanaula,"  etc.  (His-
tory of  Alabama,  p.  23,  reprint,  1896  .  He  overlooks  the  fai  I  thai  1 Ihiaha  was  nol  a
Cherokee  town,  but  belonged  to  the  province  of  Coca — i.  e.,  the  territorj  of  the
Creek  [ndians.
\  careful  study  of  the  four  original  narratives  makes  it  plain  that  the  expedition
did  ii"t  descend  either  the  '  tostanaula  or  the  Etowah,  and  thai  consequently  <  ;hiaha
could  not  have  been  at  their  junction,  the  present  site  of  Rome.     On  the  othei  hand
the  conclusion  is  irresistible  that  the  march  was  down  the  Chattal   thee  from  its
extreme  head  springs  in  the  mountains,  and  that  the  Chiaha  of  the  narrative  was
the  Lower  Creek  town  of  the  same  name,  more  pommonly  known  as  Chehaw,  for-
merly on  this  river  in  the  neighborh   I  of  the  modern  city  of  Columbus,  Georgia,
while  Coste,  in  the  narrative  the  next  adjacent  town,  was  Kasi'ta,  "r  Cusseta,  of  the
same  group  of  villages.  The  falls  at  this  point  mark  the  geologic  break  line  where
the  river  changes  from  a  clear,  swift  current  to  a  broad,  slow-moving  stream  ol  the
lower  country.  Attracted  by  the  fisheries  and  the  fertile  bottom  lands  the  Lower
Creeks  established  here  their  settlement  nucleus,  and  here,  up  to  the  ln-ginning  of
the  present  century,  they  had  within  easy  distance  of  each  other  on  both  sides  of
the  river  some  fifteen  towns,  among  which  were  Chiaha  (Chehaw  .  I  hiahudshi
(Little  Chehaw),  and  Kasi'ta  (Cusseta).  Most  of  these  settlements  were  within what  are  now  Muscogee  and  Chattahoochee  counties,  Georgia,  and  Lee  and  Russell
counties,  Alabama  (see  town  list  and  map  in  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend).
Large  mounds  and  other  earthworks  on  both  sides  of  the  river  in  the  vicinity  of
Columbus  attest  the  importance  of  tin-  site  in  ancient  days,  while  the  general  appear-
ance indicates  that  at  times  the  adjacent  low  grounds  were  submerged  or  cut  off  by
Overflows  from  the  main  stream.  A  principal  trail  crossed  here  from  the  I  Icniulgee,
pa  — in-  I  iy  Tuskegee  to  the  Upper  Creek  towns  about  the  junction  of  the  Coosa  and
Talla]   sa    in   Alabama.      \t   the    beginning  of   the  present  century  this  trail  was
know  n  to  the  trailers  a-  "  De  Soto's  trace  "  (W   Iward,  Reminiscences,  p.  76).     As the  Indian  towns  frequently  shift  their  position  within  a  limited  range  on  account
of  epidemics,  freshets,  or  impoverishment  of  the  soil,  it  is  not  neeessarj  to  assume
that  they  occupied  exactly  the  same  sites  in  1540  as  in  1800,  1  mt  only  that  as  a  group
they  were  in  the  same  general  vicinity.  Thus  Kasi'ta  itself  was  at  one  period  above
the  falls  and  at  a  later  period  some  eight  miles  belowthem.     Both  Kasi'ta  and  Chiaha were  principal  towns,  with  several  branch  villages.
The  time  given  as  occupied  on  the  march  from  Canasagua  to  Chiaha  would  seem
too  little  for  the  actual  distance,  but  as  we  have  seen,  the  chroniclers  do  no1  agree
among  themselves.     We  can  easily  believe  that  the  Spaniards,  buoyed  up  by  the
certainty  of  finding  f   1  and   rest  at  their  next  halting  place,  made  better  progress
along  the  smooth  rivertrail  than  while  blundering  helplessly  through  the  mountains
at  the  direction  of  a  most  unwilling*  guide.  If  Canasagua  was  any  w  here  in  the  neigh-
borhood of  Kenesaw,  in  Cobb  county,  the  time  mentioned  in  the  Elvas  or  ( larcilaso
narrative  would  probably  have  been  sufficient  for  reaching  <  Ihiaha  at  the  falls.  The
uninhabited  country  between  the  two  towns  was  the  neutral  ground  between  the
two  hostile  tribes,  the  Cherokee  and  the  ( 'reeks,  and  it  is  worth  noting  that  Kene
saw  mountain  was  made  a  point  on  the  boundary  line  afterward  established  betwe<  n
the  two  tribes  through  the  mediation  of  the  United  States  government.


200  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anx.  1
There  is  no  large  island  in  either  the  Coosa  or  the  Chattahoochee,  and  we  are
forced  to  the  conclusion  that  what  the  chronicle  describes  as  an  island  was  really  a
portion  of  the  bottom  land  temporarily  cut  off  by  back  water  from  a  freshet.  In  a
similar  way  "The  Slue,"  east  of  Flint  river  in  Mitchell  county,  may  have  been
formed  by  a  shifting  of  the  river  channel.  Two  months  later,  in  Alabama,  the
Spaniards  reached  a  river  so  swollen  by  rains  that  they  were  obliged  to  wait  six
days  before  they  could  cross  (Elvas).  Lederer,  while  crossing  South  Carolina  in
1670,  found  his  farther  progress  barred  by  a  "great  lake,"  which  he  puts  on  his  map
as  "Ushery  lake,"  although  there  is  no  such  lake  in  the  state;  but  the  mystery  is
explained  by  Lawson,  who,  in  going  over  the  same  ground  thirty  years  later,  found
all  the  bottom  lands  under  water  from  a  great  flood,  the  Santee  in  particular  being
36  feet  above  its  normal  level.  As  Lawson  was  a  surveyor  his  figures  may  be  con-
sidered reliable.  The  "Ushery  lake"  of  Lederer  was  simply  an  overflow  of  Catawba
river.  Flood  water  in  the  streams  of  upper  Georgia  and  Alabama  would  quickly  be
carried  off,  but  would  be  apt  to  remain  for  some  time  on  the  more  level  country
below  the  falls.
According  to  information  supplied  by  Mr  Thomas  Robinson,  an  expert  engineering
authority  familiar  with  the  lower  Chattahoochee,  there  was  formerly  a  large  mound,
now  almost  entirely  washed  away,  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river,  about  nine  miles
below  Columbus,  while  on  the  western  or  Alabama  bank,  a  mile  or  two  farther  down,
there  is  still  to  be  seen  another  of  nearly  equal  size.  "At  extreme  freshets  both  of
these  mounds  were  partly  submerged.  To  the  east  of  the  former,  known  as  the
Indian  mound,  the  flood  plain  is  a  mile  or  two  wide,  and  along  the  eastern  side  of
the  plain  stretches  a  series  of  swamps  or  wooded  sloughs,  indicating  an  old  river  bed.
All  the  plain  between  the  present  river  and  the  sloughs  is  river-made  land.  The
river  bluff  along  by  the  mound  on  the  Georgia  side  is  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  above
tlie  present  low-water  surface  of  the  stream.  About  a  mile  above  the  mound  arc  the
remains  of  what  was  known  as  Jennies  island.  At  ordinary  stages  of  the  river  no
island  is  there.  The  eastern  channel  was  blocked  by  government  works  some
years  ago,  and  the  whole  is  filled  up  and  now  used  as  a  cornfield.  The  island
remains  can  be  traced  now,  I  think,  for  a  length  of  half  a  mile,  with  a  possible
extreme  width  of  300  feet.  .  .  .  This  whole  country,  on  both  sides  of  the  river,
is  full  of  Indian  lore.  I  have  mentioned  both  mounds  simply  to  indicate  that  this
portion  of  the  river  was  an  Indian  locality,  and  have  also  stated  the  facts  about  the
remains  of  Jennies  island  in  order  to  give  a  possible  clew  to  a  professional  who  might
study  the  ground." — Letter,  April  22,  1900.
Chiaha  was  the  first  town  of  the  "  province  of  Coca,"  the  territory  of  the  Coosa  or
Creek  Indians.  The  next  town  mentioned,  Coste  (Elvas  and  Ranjel),  Costehe
(Bieilma)  or  A  coste  (Garcilaso),  was  Kasi'ta,  or  Cusseta,  as  it  was  afterward  known to  the  whites.  While  Garcilaso  puts  it  at  the  lower  end  of  the  same  island  upon
which  Chiaha  was  situated,  the  Elvas  narrative  makes  it  seven  days  distant!  The
modern  towns  of  Chehaw  and  Cusseta  were  within  a  few  miles  of  each  other  on  the
Chattahoochee,  the  former  being  on  the  western  or  Alabama  side,  while  Cusseta,  in
1799,  was  on  the  east  or  Georgia  side  about  eight  miles  below  the  falls  at  Columbus,
and  in  Chattahoochee  county,  which  has  given  its  capital  the  same  name,  Cusseta.
From  the  general  tone  of  the  narrative  it  is  evident  that  the  two  towns  were  near
together  in  De  Soto's  time,  and  it  may  be  that  the  Elvas  chronicle  confounded  Kasi'ta with  Koasati,  a  principal  Upper  Creek  town,  a  short  distance  below  the  junction  of
the  Coosa  and  Tallapoosa.  At  Coste  they  crossed  the  river  ami  continued  westward
"through  many  towns  subject  to  the  cacique  of  Coca"  (Elvas)  until  they  came  to  the
great  town  of  Coca  itself.  This  was  Kusa  or  Coosa,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Upper
Creeks.  There  were  two  towns  of  this  name  at  different  periods.  One,  described  by
Adair  in  1775  as  "the great  and  old  beloved  town  of  refuge,  Koosah,"  was  on  the  east
bank  of  Coosa  river,  a  few  miles  southwest  of  the  present  Talladega,  Alabama.    The


muonf.vJ  DK    SOTO'S    ROUTE  201
other,  known  as  "Old < toosa,"  and  probablj  of  more  ancient  origin,  was  on  the  west
side  oi  Alabama  river,  near  the  present  site  of  Montgomery  (see  Gatschet,  Creek
Migration  Legend  I.  It  was  probablj  the  latter  \\  bich  was  visited  bj  l>o  Soto,  and  later
..ii  by  Iv  Luna,  in  1559.  Beyond  (  toca  they  passed  through  another  <  Ireek  town,  ap-
parently lower  doy  n  on  the  Alabama,  the  name  of  which  is  variously  spelled  5  taua
(Elvas,  Force  translation!.  Ytava  (Elvas,  Hakluyt  Society  translation),  or  Ctaba
(Ranjel),  and  which  may  be  connected  with  ['tiwft',  Etowah  or  "  Hightower,"  the Dame  of  a  former  Cherokee  settlement  near  the  bead  of  Etowah  river  in  Georgia.
The  Cherokee  regard  this  as  a  foreign  name,  and  its  occurrence  in  upper  Georgia,  as
well  as  in  central  Alabama,  may  help  to  support  the  tradition  that  the  southern
Cherokee  border  was  formerly  held  by  the  ('reeks.
1 1,  Soto's  route  beyond  the  Cherokee  country  does  not  concern  us  except  as  it
throws  light  upon  his  previous  progress.  In  the  seventeenth  chapter  the  Elvas  nar-
rative summarizes  that  portion  from  the  landing  at  Tampa  bay  toapoint  insouthern
Alabama  as  follows:  "  From  the  Tort  de  Spirit..  Santo  to  Apalache,  which  is  about  an
hundred  leagues,  the  governor  went  from  east  to  west;  an.  1  from  Apalache  to  ( lutifa-
chiqui,  which  are  430  leagues,  from  the  southwest  to  the  northeast;  ami  from  Cutifa-
chiqui  to  Xualla,  which  are  about  L'">0  leagues,  from  the  south  to  the  north;  anil  from Xuallato  Tascaluea,  which  are  250  leagues  more,  an  hundred  and  ninety  of  them  he
traveled  from  east  to  west,  to  wit.  to  the  province  of  Coca;  and  the  other  60,  from
Coca  to  Tascaluca,  from  the  north  to  the  south."
Chisca  (Elvas  and  Ranjel),  the  mountainous  northern  region  in  search  of  which
men  were  sent  from  Chiaha  to  look  for  copper  and  gold,  was  somewhere  in  the
Cherokee  country  of  upper  Georgia  or  Alabama.  The  precise  location  is  not  material,
as  it  i-  now  known  that  native  copper,  in  such  condition  as  to  have  been  easily  work-
able by  the  Indians,  occurs  throughout  the  whole  southern  Allegheny  region  from
about  Anniston,  Alabama,  into  Virginia.  Notable  timls  of  native  copper  have  been
maileon  the  upper  Tallapoosa,  in  Cleburne  county,  Alabama;  about  Ducktown,  in
Polk  county,  Tennessee,  and  in  southwestern  Virginia,  one.  nugget  from  Virginia
weighing  several  pounds.  From  the  appearance  of  ancient  soapstone  vessels  which
have  been  found  in  the  same  region  there  is  even  a  possibility  that  the  Indians  had
some  knowledge  of  smelting,  as  the  Spanish  explorers  surmised  (oral  information
from  Mr  \V.  II.  Weed,  I'.  S.  Geological  Survey).  We  hear  again  of  this  "province" after  De  Soto  had  reached  the  Mississippi,  and  in  one  place  Garcilaso  seems  to
confound  it  with  another  province  called  Quizqui  (Ranjel)  or  Quizquiz  (Elvas
and  Biednia).  The  name  has  some  resemblance  to  the  Cherokee  word  tuiskwa,
''bird."
19)  I>e  Lex  a  AXii  Rooei.  |  p.  27 'l:  Jones,  in  his  lie  Soto's  March  through  Georgia,
incorrectly  ascribes  certain  traces  of  ancient  mining  operation-  in  the  Cherokee
country,  particularly  on  Valley  river  in  North  Carolina,  to  the  followers  of  I  >e  I. una,
''who,  in  1560  .  .  .  came  with  301)  Spanish  soldiers  into  this  region,  and  spent
the  summer  in  eager  and  laborious  search  for  gold."  Don  Tristan  de  Luna,  with
fifteen  hundred  men,  landed  somewhere  about  Mobile  bay  in  1559  with  the  design  of
establishing  a  permanent  Spanish  settlement  in  the  interior,  but  owing  to
sioii  of  unfortunate   happenings  the  attempt  was  abandoned  the  next  year.      In  the
course  of  his  wanderings  he  traversed  the  country  of  the  CI   taw,  Chickasaw,  and
Upper  Creeks,  as  is  shown  by  the  names  and  other  data  in  the  narrative,  but
returned  without  entering  the  mountains  or  doing  any  digging  (see  Barcia,  Ensayo
Cronologico,  pp.  32-41,  1723;  Winsor,  Narrative  and  Critical  History,  n,  pp.  257  259) .
In  1569  the  Jesuit  Rogel — called  Father  John  Roger  by  shea— began  mission  work
among  the  South  Carolina  tribes  inland  from  Santa  Elena  I  about  Port  Royal).
The  mission,  which  at  first  promised  well,  was  abandoned  next  year,  owing  to  the
unwillingness  of  the  Indians  to  give  up  their  old  habits  and  beliefs.  Shea,  in  Ins
'•Catholic   Mission.-,"    supposes   that    these   Indians  were   probably  a   pari   of   the


202  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
Cherokee,  but  a  study  of  the  Spanish  record  in  Barcia  (Ensayo,  pp.  138—14]  I  shows
thai  Rogel  penetrated  only  a  short  distance  from  the  coast.
(10)  Davies'  History  of  the  Carribby  Islands  (p.  29):  Tin-  fraudulent  char-
acter of  this  work,  which  is  itself  an  altered  translation  of  a  fictitious  history  by
Rochefort,  is  noted  by  Buckingham  Smith  (Letter  of  Hernando  de  Soto,  p.  36, 1854),
Winsor  (Narrative  and  Critical  History,  n,  p.  289),  and  Field  (Indian  Bibliography,
p.  95).  Says  Field:  "This  hook  is  an  example  of  tin-  most  unblushing  effrontery.
The  jiseuilo  author  assumes  the  credit  of  the  performance,  with  hut  the  faintest
allusion  to  its  previous  existence.  It  is  a  nearly  faithful  translation  of  Rochefort's
'  Histoire  des  Antilles.'  There  is,  however,  a  gratifying  retribution  in  Davies'  treat- ment of  Rochefort,  for  the  work  of  the  latter  was  fictitious  in  every  part  which  was
not  purloined  from  authors  whose  knowledge  furnished  him  with  all  in  his  treatise
which  was  true."
(11)  Ancient  Spamsit  Mixes  i  pp.  29,  31  I:  As  the  existence  of  the  precious  metals
in  the  southern  Alleghenies  was  known  to  the  Spaniards  from  a  very  early  period,  it
is  probable  that  more  thorough  exploration  of  that  region  will  bring  to  light  many
evidences  of  their  mining  operations.  In  his  "Antiquities  of  the  Southern  Indians,'' Jones  describes  a  sort  of  subterranean  village  discovered  in  1834  on  Dukes  creek,
White  county,  Georgia,  consisting  of  a  row  of  small  loir  cabins  extending  along  the
creek,  hut  imbedded  several  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  upon  which  lame
trees  were  growing,  the  inference  being  that  the  houses  had  been  thus  covered  by  suc-
cessive freshets.  The  loss  had  been  notched  ami  shaped  apparently  with  sharp  metal-
lic tools.  Shafts  have  been  discovered  on  Valley  river,  North  Carolina,  at  the  bottom
of  one  of  which  was  found,  in  1854,  a  well-] ■reserved  windlass  of  hewn  oak  timbers,
showing  traces  of  having  once  been  banded  with  iron.  Another  shaft,  passing  through
hard  rock,  showed  the  marks  of  sharp  tools  used  in  the  boring.  The  casing  and
other  timbers  were  still  sound  (Jones,  pp.  48,  49).  Similar  ancient  shafts  have  been
found  in  other  places  in  upper  Georgia  and  western  Xorth  Carolina,  together  with
some  remarkable  stone-built  fortifications  or  corrals,  notably  at  Fort  mountain,  in
Murray  county,  Georgia,  and  on  Silver  creek,  a  few  miles  from  Rome,  Georgia.
Very  recently  remains  of  an  early  white  settlement,  traditionally  ascribed  to  the
Spaniards,  have  been  reported  from  Lincolnton,  North  Carolina,  on  the  edge  of  the
ancient  country  of  the  Sara,  among  whom  the  Spaniards  built  a  fort  in  1566.  The
works  include  a  dam  of  cut  stone,  a  series  of  low  pillars  of  cut  stone,  arranged  in
squares  as  though  intended  for  foundations,  a  stone-walled  well,  a  quarry  from  which
the  stone  had  been  procured,  a  fire  pit,  and  a  series  of  sinks,  extending  along  the
stream,  in  which  were  found  remains  of  timbers  suggesting  the  subterranean  cabins
on  Dukes  creek.  All  these  antedated  the  first  settlement  of  that  region,  about  the
year  1750.  Ancient  mining  indications  are  also  reported  from  Kings  mountain,
about  twenty  miles  distant  (Reinhardt  MS,  1900,  in  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology
archives  I.  The  Spanish  miners  of  whom  Lederer  heard  in  1670  and  Moore  in  1690
were  probably  at  work  in  this  neighborhood.
(12)  Sir  William  Johnson  (p.  38):  This  great  soldier,  whose  history  is  so  insep-
arably   incited  with  that  of  the  Six  Nations,  was  born  in  the  county  Meath,  Ireland,
in  1715,  and  died  at  Johnstown,  New  York,  in  1774.  The  younger  son  of  an  Irish
gentleman,  he  left  his  native  country  in  1738  in  consequence  of  a  disappointment  in
love,  and  emigrated  to  America,  where  he  undertook  the  settlement  of  a  large  tract
of  wild  land  belonging  to  his  uncle,  which  lay  along  the  south  side  of  the  Mohawk
river  in  what  was  then  the  wilderness  of  New  York.  This  brought  him  into  close
contact  with  the  Six  Nations,  particularly  the  Mohawks,  in  whom  he  became  SO  much
interested  as  to  learn  their  language  and  in  some  degree  to  accommodate  himself  to
their  customs,  sometimes  even  to  the  wearing  of  the  native  costume.  This  interest,
together  with  his  natural  kindness  and  dignity,  completely  won  the  hearts  of  the  Six


iioosey]  sik    WILLIAM    JOHNSON       CAPT.   JOHN    ST1    \i:i  203
Nations,  over  whom  he  acquired  a  greater  influence  than  has  ever  been  exercised
bj  an)  other  white  man  hefore  or  since.  He  was  formally  adopted  as  a  chief  by  the
Mohawk  tribe.  In  17-1-1.  being  still  a  very  young  man,  he  "as  placed  in  i
British  affairs  with  the  six  Nations,  and  iii  1755  was  regularly  commissioned  at
then  own  urgent  request  as  superintendent  for  the  Six  Nations  and  their  dependent
and  allied  tribes,  a  position  which  he  held  for  the  rest  of  his  life.     In  1748  he  was
also  placed  ii   mmand  of  the  New  York  colonial  forces,  and  two  years  later  was
appointed  to  the  governor's  council.  \t  the  beginning  of  the  French  and  Indian  war
he  was  commissioned  a  major-general.  He  defeated  Dieskau  at  the  battle  of  Lake
George,  where  he  was  severely  wounded  earl)  in  the  art  ion.  bu(  refused  to  leave  the
field.  For  this  service  he  received  the  thanks  of  Parliament,  a  grant  of  £5,000,  and
a  baronetcy.  Healso  distinguished  himself  at  Ticonderoga  and  Fort  Niagara,  taking
the  latter  after  routing  the  French  army  sent  to  its  relief.  At  the  head  of  his  [ndian
and  colonial  forces  he  took  part  in  other  actions  and  expeditions,  and  was  present  at
the  surrender  of  Montreal.  For  his  services  throughout  the  war  he  received  a  grant
ot  100,000  acres  of  land  north  of  the  Mohawk  river,  lien'  he  built  "Johnson
Hall."  which  still  stands,  near  the  \  illage  of  Johnstovi  n.  w  hich  was  laid  out  by  him
with  stores,  church,  and  other  buildings,  at  his  own  expense.  \t  Johnson  Hall  he
lived  in  the  style  of  an  old  country  baron,  dividing  his  attention  between  Indian
affairs  ami  the  raising  of  blooded  stock,  and  dispensing  a  princely  hospitality  to  all
comers.  His  influence  alone  prevented  the  six  Nations  joining  Pontiac's  great  con-
federacy against  the  English.  In  1768  he  concluded  the  treaty  of  Fort  Stanwix,
which  fixed  the  Ohio  as  the  boundary  between  the  northern  colonic-  and  the  western
tribes,  the  boundary  for  which  the  Indians  afterward  contended  against  the  Ameri-
cans until  1795.  In  17:i!i  he  married  a  German  girl  of  the  Mohawk  valley,  who  died
after  bearing  him  three  children.  Later  in  life  he  formed  a  connection  with  the
sister  of  Brant,  the  Mohawk  chief.     He  died  from  over-exertion  at  an  Indian  council.
His  son,  Sir  John  Johnson,  succ   led  to  his  title  and  estates,  and  on  the  breaking  out
of  the  Revolution  espoused  the  British  side,  drawing  with  him  the  Mohawks  and
a  great  part  of  the  other  Six  Nations,  who  abandoned  their  homes  and  tied  with
him  to  Canada  I  see  \Y.  L.  Stone.  Life  of  Sir  William  Johnson).
(13)  Captain  John  Stc  u;t  (p. 44):  This  distinguished  officer  was   itemporaneous
with  Sir  William  Johnson,  and  sprang  from  the  same  adventurous  Keltic  stock
which  has  furnished  so  many  men  conspicuous  in  our  early  Indian  history.  Born  in
Scotland  about  the  year  I7nn.  he  came  to  America  in  1 7.'i."..  was  appointed  to  a subordinate  command  in  the  British  service,  and  soon  became  a  favorite  with  the
Indians.  When  Fort  Loudon  was  taken  by  the  Cherokee  in  1760,  he  was  second  in
command,  and  his  rescue  by  Ata-kullakulla  is  one  of  the  romantic  episodes  of  that
period.  In  1763  he  was  appointed  superintendent  for  the  southern  tribes,  a  position
which  he  continued  to  hold  until  his  death.  In  1768  he  negotiated  with  the  Chero-
kee the  treaty  of  Hard  Labor  by  which  the  Kanawha  was  lixed  as  the  western
boundary  of  Virginia,  Sir  William  Johnson  at  the  same  time  concluding  a  treaty  with
the  northern  tribes  by  which  the  boundary  was  continued  northward  along  the  Ohio.
At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  he  organized  the  Cherokeeand  other  southern
trilies,  with  the  white  loyalists, against  the  Americans,  and  was  largely  responsible
I'orthe  Lndian  outrages  along  the  southern  border.     He  planned  a  general  invasion by  the  southern  trilies  along  the  whole  frontier,  in  i   Deration  with  a  British  force
to  be  landed  in  western  Florida,  while  a  British  licet  should  occupy  the  attention  of
the  American-  on  the  coast  side  and  the  T<  iries  should  rise  in  the  interior.  I  In  the
discovery  of  the  plot  and  the  subsequent  defeat  of  the  Cherokee  by  the  Americans.
he  tied  to  Florida  and  soon  afterward  sailed  for   England,  where  he  die.  1  in   1770.
(14)  Nancy  Ward  (p.  47):    A  noted  halfbreed  Cherokee  woman,  the  date  and
place  of  whose  birth  and  death  are  alike  unknown.      It  is  said  that  her  father  was  a


204  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  Teth.  axn.  19
British  officer  named  Ward  and  her  mother  a  sister  of  Ata-kullakulla,  principal
chief  of  the  Nation  at  the  time  of  the  first  Cherokee  war.  She  was  probably  related
to  Brian  Ward,  an  oldtime  trader  among  the  Cherokee,  mentioned  elsewhere  in  con-
nection with  the  battle  of  Tali'wa.  During  the  Revolutionary  period  she  resided  at
Echota,  the  national  capital,  where  she  held  the  office  of  "Beloved  Woman,"  or
"Pretty  Woman,"  by  virtue  of  which  she  was  entitled  to  speak  in  councils  and  to
decide  the  fate  of  captives.  She  distinguished  herself  by  her  constant  friendship
for  the  Americans,  always  using  her  best  effort  to  bring  about  peace  between  them
and  her  own  people,  and  frequently  giving  timely  warning  of  projected  Indian  raids,
notably  on  th   :casion  of  the  great  invasion  of  the  Watauga  and  Holston  settle-
ments in  177ti.  A  Mrs  Bean,  captured  during  this  incursion,  was  saved  by  her  inter-
position after  having  been  condemned  to  death  and  already  bound  to  the  stake.  In
1780,  on  occasion  of  another  Cherokee  outbreak,  she  assisted  a  number  of  traders  to
escape,  and  the  next  year  was  sent  by  the  chiefs  to  make  peace  with  Sevier  and
Campbell,  who  were  advancing  against  the  Cherokee  towns.  Campbell  speaks  of
her  in  his  report  as  "the  famous  Indian  woman,  Nancy  Ward."  Although  peace
was  not  then  granted,  her  relatives,  when  brought  in  later  with  other  prisoners,
were  treated  with  the  consideration  due  in  return  for  her  good  offices.  She  is
described  by  Robertson,  who  visited  her  about  this  time,  as  "queenly  and  com-
manding" in  appearance  and  manner,  and  her  house  as  furnished  in  accordance  with
her  liij;li  dignity.  When  among  the  Arkansas  Cherokee  in  1819,  Nuttall  was  told
that  she  had  introduced  the  first  cows  into  the  Nation,  and  that  by  her  own  and  her
children's  influence  the  condition  of  the  Cherokee  had  been  greatly  elevated.  He  was told  also  that  her  advice  and  counsel  bordered  on  supreme,  and  that  her  interference
was  allowed  to  be  decisive  even  in  affairs  of  life  and  death.  Although  he  speaks
in  the  present  tense,  it  is  hardly  probable  that  she  was  then  still  alive,  and  he  does
not  claim  to  have  met  her.  Her  descendants  are  still  found  in  the  Nation.  See
Haywood,  Natural  and  Aboriginal  Tennessee;  Ramsey,  Tennessee;  Nuttall,  Travels,
p.  130,  1821;  Campbell  letter,  1781,  and  Springstone  deposition,  1781,  in  Virginia
State  Papers  i,  pp.  435,  436,  447,  1875;  Appleton's  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography.
(15)  General  James  Robertson  (p.  48):  This  distinguished  pioneer  and  founder
of  Nashville  was  born  in  Brunswick  county.  Virginia,  in  1742,  and  died  at  the  ( jhick-
asaw  agency  in  west  Tennessee  in  1814.  Like  most  of  the  men  prominent  in  the
early  history  of  Tennessee,  he  was  of  Scotch-Irish  ancestry.  His  father  having
removed  about  1750  to  western  North  Carolina,  the  boy  grew  up  without  education,
but  with  a  strong  love  for  adventure,  which  he  gratified  by  making  exploring  expe-
ditions across  the  mountains.  After  his  marriage  his  wife  taught  him  to  read  ami
write.  In  1771  he  led  a  colony  to  the  Watauga  river  and  established  the  settlement
which  became  the  nucleus  of  the  future  state  of  Tennessee.  He  took  a  leading  part
in  the  organization  of  the  Watauga  Association,  the  earliest  organized  government
within  the  state,  and  afterward  served  in  Dunmore's  war,  taking  part  in  the  bloody
battle  of  Point  Pleasant  in  1774.  He  participated  in  the  earlier  Revolutionary  cam-
paigns against  the  Cherokee,  and  in  1777  was  appointed  agent  to  reside  at  their  cap-
ital, Echota,  and  act  as  a  medium  in  their  correspondence  with  the  state  governments
of  North  Carolina  (including  Tennessee)  and  Virginia.  In  this  capacity  he  gave
timely  warning  of  a  contemplated  invasion  by  the  hostile  portion  of  the  tribe  early
in  17711.  Si « >n  after  in  the  same  year  he  led  a  preliminary  exploration  from  Watauga
to  the  Cumberland.  He  brought  out  a  larger  party  late  in  the  fall,  and  in  the  spring
of  17sil  built  the  first  stockades  on  the  site  which  he  named  Nashborough,  now  Nash-
ville. <  >nly  his  force  of  character  was  able  to  hold  the  infant  settlement  together  in
the  lace  of  hardships  and  Indian  hostilities,  but  by  his  tact  and  firmness  he  was
finally  able  to  make  peace  with  the  surrounding  tribes,  and  established  the  Cumber-
land settlement  upon  a  secure  basis.  The  Spanish  government  at  one  time  unsuc-
cessfully attempted  to  engage  him  in  a  plot  to  cut  off  the  western  territory  from  the


mooney]  rutheeford's  route  205
United  Stairs,  but  met  a  patriotic  refusal.  Having  beei   mmissioned  a  brigadier-
general  in  1790,  he  continued  to  organize  campaigns,  resist  invasions,  and  negotiate
treaties  until  the  final  close  of  the  Indian  wars  in  Tennessee.  He  afterward  held  the
appointment  of  Indian  commissioner  to  the  <  !hickasa\*  and  Choctaw.  See  Ramsey,
Tennessee;  Roosevelt,  Winning  of  the  West;  Appleton's  Cyclopaedia  of  American Bii  igraphy.
iliii  General  Griffith  Rutherford  (p.  48) :  Although  this  Revolutionary  offi-
ce] commanded  the  greatest  expedition  ever  sent  against  the  Cherokee,  with  such
distinguished  success  that  both  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee  have  named  counties
in  his  honor,  little  appears  to  be  definitely  known  of  his  history.  He  was  born  in
Ireland  about  1731,  and,  emigrating  to  America,  settled  near  Salisbury,  North  Caro-
lina. On  the  opening  of  the  Revolutionary  struggle  he  became  a  member  of  the
Provincial  Congress  and  Council  of  Safety.  In  June,  I77ti,  he  was  commissioned  a
brigadier-general  in  the  American  army,  and  a  few  months  later  led  his  celebrated
expedition  against  the  Cherokee,  as  elsewhere  narrated.  He  rendered  other  impor-
tant sen  ice  in  the  Revolution,  in  one  battle  being  taken  prisoner  by  the  British  and
held  by  them  nearly  a  year,  lie  afterward  served  in  the  state  senate  of  North  Caro-
lina, and,  subsequently  removing  to  Tennessee,  was  for  some  time  a  member  of  its
territorial  council.     He  died  in  Tennessee  about  1800.
i  17'  Rutherford's  route  l  p.  49):  The  various  North  Carolina  detachments
which  combined  to  form  Rutherford's  expedition  against  the  Cherokee  in  the
autumn  of  1770  organized  at  different  points  about  the  upper  Catawba  and  probably
concentrated  at  Davidson's  fort,  now  Old  tort,  in  McDowell  county.  Thence,
advancing  westward  closely  upon  the  line  of  the  present  Southern  railroad  and  its
Western  North  Carolina  branch,  the  army  crossed  the  Blue  ridge  over  the  Swanna-
noa  gap  and  went  down  the  Swannanoa  to  its  junction  with  the  French  Broad,
crossing  the  latter  at  the  Warrior  ford,  below  the  present  Asheville;  thence  up
Hominy  creek  and  across  the  ridge  to  Pigeon  river,  crossing  it  a  fewmiles  below  the
junction  of  the  Ea^t  and  West  forks;  thence  to  Richland  creek,  crossing  it  just  above
the  present  Waynesville;  and  over  the  dividing  ridge  between  the  present  Hayw   1
and  Jackson  counties  to  the  head  of  Scott's  creek;  thence  down  that  creek  by  "a
blind  path  through  a  very  mountainous  bad  way,"  as  Moore's  old  narrative  has  it,
to  its  junction  with  the  Tuckasegee  river  just  below  the  present  Webster:  thence,
crossing  to  the  west  (south)  side  of  the  river,  the  troops  followed  a  main  trail  down
the  stream  for  a  tew  miles  until  they  came  to  the  first  Cherokee  town,  Stekoa,  on
the  site  of  the  farm  formerly  owned  by  Colonel  William  H.  Thomas,  just  above  tin'
present  railroad  village  of  Whittier.  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  After  destroying
the  town  a  detachment  left  the  main  body  and  pursued  the  fugitives  northward  on
tl   ther  sideof  the  river  to  Oconaluftee  river  and  Soco  creek,  getting  back  afterward
to  the  settlements  by  steering  an  easterly  course  across  the  mountains  to  Richland
creek  (Moore  narrative).  The  main  army,  under  Rutherford,  crossed  the  dividing
ridge  to  the  southward  of  Whittier  and  descended  Cowee  creek  to  the  waters  of  Little
Tennessee,  in  the  present  Macon  county.  After  destroying  the  towns  in  this  vicinity
tlie  army  ascended  Cartooyaja  creek,  west  from  the  present  Franklin,  ami  crossed  the
Nantahala  mountains  at  Waya  gap — where  a  fight  took  place — to  Nantahala  river,
probably  at  the  town  of  the  same  name,  about  the  present  Jarretts  station.  From
here  the  march  was  west  across  the  mountain  into  the  present  Cherokee  county  and
down  Valley  river  to  its  junction  with  the  Hiwassee,  at  the  present  Murphy.
Authorities:  Moore  narrative  and  Wilson  letter  in  North  Carolina  University  Maga-
zine, February,  1888;  Ramsey,  Tennessee,  p.  164;  Roosevelt,  Winning  of  the  West,
t,  pp.  300-302;  Royce,  Cherokee  map;  personal  information  from  Colonel  William
H.  Thomas,  Major  James  Bryson,  whose  grandfather  was  with  Rutherford,  and
Cherokee  informant.-.
(18)   Colonel  William  Christian    (p.  50):   Colonel    William  Christian,  some-


206  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ask.19
Unit's  incorrectly  called  Christy,  was  born  in  Berkeley  county,  Virginia,  in  1732.
Accustomed  to  frontier  warfare  almost  from  boyhood,  he  served  in  the  French  and
Indian  war  with  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was  afterward  in  command  of  the  Ten-
nessee and  North  Carolina  forces  which  participated  in  the  great  battle  of  Point
Pleasant  in  1774,  although  he  himself  arrived  too  late  for  the  fight.  He  organized
a  regiment  at  the  opening  of  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  in  1776  led  an  expedition
from  Virginia  against  the  Upper  Cherokee  and  compelled  them  to  sue  fur  peace.
In  1782,  while  upon  an  expedition  against  the  Ohio  tribes,  he  was  captured  and
burned  at  the  stake.
(  19)  The  pBEAT  Indian  war  path  (  p.  50):  This  noted  Indian  thoroughfare  from
Virginia  through  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  to  the  Creek  country  in  Alabama  and
Georgia  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  early  narrative  of  that  section,  and  is  indi-
cated on  the  maps  accompanying  Ramsey's  Annals  of  Tennessee  and  Royce's  Chero-
kee Nation,  in  the  Fifth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology.  Royce's  map
shows  it  in  more  correct  detail.  It  was  the  great  trading  and  war  path  between  the
northern  and  southern  tribes,  and  along  the  same  path  Christian,  Sevier,  and  others
of  the  old  Indian  fighters  led  their  men  to  the  destruction  of  the  towns  on  Little
Tennessee,  Hiwassee,  and  southward.
According  to  Ramsey  (p.  88),  one  branch  of  it  ran  nearly  on  the.  line  of  the
later  Btage  road  from  Harpers  ferry  to  Knoxville,  passing  the  Big  lick  in  Bote-
tourt county,  Virginia,  crossing  New  river  near  old  Fort  Chiswell  (which  stood  on
the  south  bank  of  Reed  creek  of  New  river,  about  nine  miles  east  from  Wytheville,
Virginia)  crossing  Holston  at  the  Seven-mile  ford,  thence  to  the  left  of  the  stage  road
near  the  river  to  the  north  fork  of  Holston,  "crossing  as  at  present"  ;  thence  to  Big
creek,  and,  crossing  the  Holston  at  Dodson'sford,  to  the  Grassy  springs  near  the  former
residence  of  Micaiah  Lea;  thence  down  the  Nolichucky  to  Long  creek,  up  it  to  its
head,  and  down  Dumplin  creek  nearly  to  its  mouth,  where  the  path  bent  to  the  left
and  crossed  French  Broad  near  Buckinghams  island.  Here  a  branch  left  it  and  went
up  the  West  fork  of  Little  Pigeon  and  across  the  mountains  to  the  Middle  towns  on
Tuckasegee  and  the  upper  Little  Tennessee.  The  main  trail  continued  up  Boyd's
creek  to  its  head,  and  down  Ellejoy  creek  to  Little  river,  crossing  near  Henry's  place;
thence  by  the  present  Maryville  to  the  mouth  of  Tellico,  and,  passing  through  the
Cherokee  towns  of  Tellico,  Echota,  and  Hiwassee,  down  the  Coosa,  connecting  with
the  great  war  path  of  the  Creeks.  Near  the  Wolf  hills,  now  Abingdon,  Virginia,
another  path  came  in  from  Kentucky,  passing  through  the  Cumberland  gap.  It  was
along  this  latter  road  that  the  early  explorers  entered  Kentucky,  and  along  it  also
the  Shawano  and  other  Ohio  tribes  often  penetrated  to  raid  upon  the  Holston  and
New  river  settlements.
On  Royce's  map  the  trail  is  indicated  from  Virginia  southward.  Starting  from
the  junction  of  Moccasin  creek  with  the  North  fork  of  Holston,  just  above  the
Tennessee  state  line,  it  crosses  the  latter  river  from  the  east  side  at  its  mouth  or
junction  with  the  South  fork,  just  below  Kingsport  or  the  Long  island;  then  follows
down  along  the  west  side  of  the  Holston,  crossing  Big  creek  at  its  mouth,  and  crossing
to  the  south  (east)  side  of  Holston  at  Dodson's  creek;  thence  up  along  the  east  side  of
Dodson's  creek  and  across  Big  Gap  creek,  following  it  for  a  short  distance  and  con-
tinuing southwest,  just  touching  Nolichucky,  passing  up  the  west  side  of  Long  creek
of  that  stream  and  down  the  same  side  of  Dumplin  creek,  and  crossing  French  Broad
just  below  the  mouth  of  the  creek;  thence  up  along  the  west  side  of  Boyd's  creek  to
its  head  and  down  the  west  side  of  Ellejoy  creek  to  and  across  Little  river;  thence
through  the  present  Maryville  to  cross  Little  Tennessee  at  the  entrance  of  Tellico
river,  where  old  Fort  Loudon  was  built;  thence  turning  up  along  the  south  side  of
Little  Tennessee  river  to  Echota,  the  ancient  capital,  and  then  southwest  across
Tellico  river  along  the  ridge  between  Chestua  and  Canasauga  creeks,  and  crossing
the  latter  near  its  mouth  to  strike  Hiwassee  river  at  the  town  of  the  same  name;


PEACE    TOWNS    AM)    TOWNS    OF    REFUGE  207
thence  southwest,  crossing  Ocoee  river  near  its  month,  passing  south  of  Cleveland,
through  the  present  Ooltewah  and  across  Chickamauga  creek  into  Georgia  and
Alabama.
According  to  Timberlake  Memoirs,  with  map,  1765),  the  trail  crossed  Little  Ten-
nessee from  Echota,  northward,  in  two  places,  just  above  and  below  Four-mile
creek,  the  first  camping  place  being  at  the  junction  of  Ellejoy  creek  and  Little  river,
at  the  old  town  sin-.     It  crossed  Holston  « ithin  a  mile  of  Fort  Robinson.
According  to  Hutchins  (Topographical  Descripti   f  America,  p.  24,  1778),  tin-
road  which  went  through  Cumberland  gap  was  the  one  taken  by  the  northern
[ndians  in  their  incursions  into  the  "<  iuttawa"  country,  and  went  from  Sandusky,
on  Lake  Erie,  by  a  direct  path  to  the  mouth  of  Scioto  (where  Portsmouth  now  is  i
and  thence  across  Kentucky  to  the  gap.
(20)  Peace  downs  ind  towns  oi  refcoe  (p.  51):  Towns  of  refuge  existed  among
the  Cherokee,  the  Creeks,  and  probably  other  Italian  tribes,  as  well  as  among  the
ancient  Hebrews,  the  institution  being  a  merciful  provision  for  softening  the  harsh-
ness of  tin1  primitive  law,  which  required  a  life  lor  a  life.  We  learn  from  Deuteron-
omy that  Moses  appointed  three  cities  on  tin- east  side  of  Jordan  "that  the  slayer
miirlit  flee  thither  which  should  kill  his  neighbor  unaware- and  hated  him  not  in
times  past,  and  that  fleeing  into  one  of  these  cities  he  might  live."     It  was  also
ordained  that  as  more  territory  was  conquered  from  the  heathen  three  additional
cities  should  be  thus  set  aside  as  havens  of  refuge  for  those  who  should  accidentally
take  human  lite,  and  w  here  they  should  be  safe  until  the  matter  could  lie  adjusted.
The  wilful  murderer,  however,  was  not  to  I  ,e  sheltered,  hut  delivered  up  to  punish-
ment without  pity  (Dent,  tv,  41-4:;.  and  \i\,  1-11).
Echota,  the  ancient  Cherokee  capital  near  the  mouth  of  Little  Tennessee,  was  the
Cherokee  town  of  refuge,  commonly  designated  as  the  "white  town"  or  "peace
town."  According  to  Adair,  the  Cherokee  in  his  time,  although  extremely  degen-
erate in  other  things,  still  observed  the  law  so  strictly  in  this  regard  that  even  a
wilful  murderer  who  might  succeed  in  making  his  escape  to  that  town  was  safe  so
long  as  he  remained  there,  although,  unless  the  matter  was  compounded  in  the
meantime,  the  friends  of  the  slain  person  would  seldom  allow  him  to  reach  home
alive  after  leaving  it.  He  tells  how  a  trader  who  had  killed  an  Indian  to  protect  his
own  property  took  refuge  in  Echota,  and  after  having  been  there  for  some  months
prepared  to  return  to  his  trading  store,  which  was  hut  a  short  distance  away,  hut  was
assured  by  the  chiefs  that  he  would  he  killed  if  he  ventured  outside  the  town.  He
was  accordingly  obliged  to  stay  a  longer  time  until  the  tears  of  the  bereaved  relatives
had  been  wiped  away  with  presents.  In  another  place  the  same  author  tells  how  a
Cherokee,  having  killed  a  trader,  was  pursued  ami  attempted  to  take  refuge  in  the
town,  hut  was  driven  off  into  the  river  as  soon  as  he  came  in  sight  by  the  inhabit-
ants, who  feared  either  to  have   their  tow  n  polluted  by  the  shedding  of   blond  or  to
provoke  the  English  bygivinghim  sanctuary  (Adair,  American  Indians,  p.  158,  1775).
In  1768  ( fconostota,  speaking  on  behalf  of  the  Cherokee  delegates  who  had  come  to
Johnson  Hall  to  make  peace  with  the  [roquois,  said:  "  We  come  from  Cbotte,  where  the
wise  [white?]  house,  the  house  of   peace  IS  erei  I'd"   (treaty  record,   17hS,  New    York
Colonial  Documents,  vm,  p.  42, 1  sr>7  ) .     In  I786the  friendly  Cherokee  made  "Chota"
the  watchword  by  which  the  Americans  might  he  able  to  distinguish  them  from  the
hostile  Creeks  (  Ramsey.  Tennessee,  p. 343).  From  conversati.m  with  old  ( 'herokeeit seems  probable  that  in  cases  where  no  satisfaction  was  made  by  the  relatives  of  the
man-slayer  he  continued  to  reside  close  within  the  limits  of  the  town  until  the  next
recurrence  of  the  annual  Green-corn  dance,  when  a  general  a   esty  was  pro-
claimed.
Among  the  Creeks  the  ancient  town  of  Kusa  or  Coosa,  on  Coosa  river  in  Alabama,
was  a  town  of  refuge.     In  Adair's  time,  although  then  almost  deserted  and  in  ruins,  it
was  still  a  place  of  safety  for  one  who  had  taken  human  life  without  design.     Certain


208  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ahn.19
towns  were  also  known  as  peace  towns,  from  their  prominence  in  peace  ceremonials
and  treaty  making.  Upon  this  Adair  says:  "In  almost  every  Indian  nation  there
are  several  peaerithlr  twrns,  which  are  called  'old  beloved,  ancient,  holy,  or  white
towns.1  They  seem  to  have  been  formerly  towns  of  refuge,  for  it  is  not  in  the
memory  of  their  oldest  people  that  ever  human  blood  was  shed  in  them,  although
they  often  force  persons  from  thence  and  put  them  to  death  elsewhere." — Adair,
American  Indians,  159.  A  closely  parallel  institution  seems  to  have  existed  among
the  Seneca.  "The  Seneca  nation,  ever  the  largest,  and  guarding  the  western  door
of  the.' long  house,'  which  was  threatened  alike  from  the  north,  west,  and  smith,
had  traditions  peculiarly  their  own,  besides  those  common  to  the  other  members  of
the  confederacy.  The  stronghold  or  fort,  Gau-stra-yea,  on  the  mountain  ridge,  four
miles  east  of  Lewiston,  had  a  peculiar  character  as  the  residence  of  a  virgin  queen
known  as  the 'Peacemaker. '  When  the  Iroquois  confederacy  was  first  formed  the
prime  factors  were  mutual  protection  and  domestic  peace,  and  this  fort  was  designed
to  afford  comfort  and  relieve  the  distress  incident  to  war.  It  was  a  true  'city  of
refuge,'  to  which  fugitives  from  battle,  whatever  their  nationality,  might  flee  for
safety  and  find  generous  entertainment.  Curtains  of  deerskin  separated  pursuer  and
pursued  while  they  were  being  lodged  and  fed.  At  parting,  the  curtains  were  with-
drawn, and  the  hostile  parties,  having  shared  the  hospitality  of  the  queen,  could
neither  renew  hostility  or  pursuit  without  the  queen's  consent.  According  to  tra-
dition, no  virgin  had  for  many  generations  been  counted  worthy  to  fill  the  place  or
possessed  the  genius  and  gifts  to  honor  the  position.  In  1878  the  Tonawanda  band
proposed  to  revive  the  office  and  conferred  upon  Caroline  Parker  the  title." — Car-
rington,  in  Six  Nations  of  New-  York,  Extra  Bulletin  Eleventh  Census,  p.  73,  1892.
(21)  Scalping  by  whites  (p.  53) :  To  the  student,  aware  how  easily  the  civilized
man  reverts  to  his  original  savagery  when  brought  in  close  contact  with  its  condi-
tions, it  will  be  no  surprise  to  learn  that  every  barbarous  practice  of  Indian  warfare
was  quickly  adopted  by  the  white  pioneer  and  soldier  and  frequently  legalized  and
encouraged  by  local  authority.  Scalping,  while  the  most  common,  was  probably
the  least  savage  and  cruel  of  them  all,  being  usually  performed  after  the  victim  was
already  dead,  with  the  primary  purpose  of  securing  a  trophy  of  the  victory.  The
tortures,  mutilations,  and  nameless  deviltries  inflicted  upon  Indians  by  their  white
conquerors  in  the  early  days  could  hardly  be  paralleled  even  in  civilized  Europe,
when  burning  at  the  stake  was  the  punishment  for  holding  original  opinions  and
sawing  into  two  pieces  the  penalty  for  desertion.  Actual  torture  of  Indians  by  legal
sanction  was  rare  within  the  English  colonies,  but  mutilation  was  common  ami
scalping  was  the  rule  down  to  the  end  of  the  war  of  1812,  and  has  been  practiced
more  or  less  in  almost  every  Indian  war  down  to  the  latest.  Captain  Church,  who
commanded  in  King  Philip's  war  in  1676,  states  that  his  men  received  thirty  shil-
lings a  head  for  every  Indian  killed  or  taken;  and  Philip's  head,  after  it  was  cut  off,
"  went  at  the  same  price."  When  the  chief  was  killed  one  of  his  hands  was  cut  off
and  given  to  his  Indian  slayer,  "to  show  to  such  gentlemen  as  would  bestow  gratui-
ties upon  him,  and  accordingly  he  got  many  a  penny  by  it."  His  other  hand  was
chopped  off  and  sent  to  Boston  for  exhibition,  his  head  was  sent  to  Plymouth  and
exposed  upon  a  scaffold  there  for  twenty  years,  while  the  rest  of  his  body  was
quartered  and  the  pieces  left  hanging  upon  four  trees.  Fifty  years  later  Massachu-
setts offered  a  bounty  of  one  hundred  pounds  for  every  Indian  scalp,  and  scalp
hunting  thus  became  a  regular  and  usually  a  profitable  business.  On  one  occasion  a
certain  Lovewell,  having  recruited  a  company  of  forty  men  for  this  purpose,  dis-
covered ten  Indians  lying  asleep  by  their  fire  and  killed  the  whole  party.  After
scalping  them  they  stretched  the  scalps  upon  hoops  and  inarched  thus  into  Boston,
where  the  scalps  were  paraded  and  the  bounty  of  one  thousand  pounds  paid  for
them.  By  a  few  other  scalps  sold  from  time  to  time  at  the  regular  market  rate,
Lovewell  was  gradually  acquiring  a  competency  when  in  May,  1725,  his  company


mooney]  SCALPING   LOWER    CHEEOKEE    REFUGEES  209
i net  disaster,     lie-  discovered  and  vl >■  .t  a  solitary  hunter,  \\  ho  was  afterward  scalped
by  tin-  chaplain   of  the    party,  bul    the    Indian  managed  to  kill  Lovewell    i»  i
being  overpowered,  on  which  the  whites  withdrew,  but  were  pursued  i>\  the  tribes-
men of  the  slain  hunter,   with  the  result  that  but  sixteen  of  them  got  homi
ius  old  ballad  of  the  time  tells  how
"Our  worthy  Captain  Lovewell  among  them  there  did  die.
The)  killed  Lieutenant  Robbins  and  wounded  good  young  Frye,
Who  was  our  English  chaplain;  he  many  Indians  slew,
And  some  of  them  he  scalped  when  bullets  round  him  flew."
When  the  mission  village  of  Xorridgewock  was  attacked  by  the  New  England  men
about  the  same  time,  women  and  children  were  made  to  suffer  the  fate  of  the  war-
riors. The  scholarly  missionary,  Rasles,  anther  .if  the  Abnaki  Dictionary,  was  shot
down  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  where  he  was  afterward  found  with  his  body  riddled
with  halls,  his  skull  crushed  and  scalped,  Ins  mouth  and  eyes  filled  with  earth,  his
limlis  broken,  and  all  his  members  mutilated-  ami  this  by  white  men.  The  border
men  .if  the  Revolutionary  period  ami  later  invariably  scalped  slain  Indian-  as  often
as  opportunity  permitted,  and.  as  has  already  Keen  shown,  both  British  and  American
officials  encouraged  the  practice  by  offers  of  bounties  ami  rewards,  even,  in  the  ease
of  tin-  former,  when  the  seal] is  were  those  of  white  people.  <  >ur  difficulties  with  the
Apache  date  from  a  treacherous  massacre  of  them  in  1836  by  a  party  of  American
scalp  hunters  in  the  pay  of  the  governor  of  Sonora.  The  bounty  offered  was  one
ounce  of  gold  per  scalp.  In  lsi>4  the  Colorado  militia  under  Colonel  Chivington
attaeked  a  party  of  Cheyennes  camped  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States
flag,  and  killed,  mutilated,  and  scalped  1 70  men,  women,  and  children,  bringing  the
scalps  into  Denver,  when-  the)  were  paraded  in  a  public  hall.  One  Lieutenant
Richmond  killed  and  scalped  three  women  and  live  children.  Scalps  were  taken  l,\
American  troops  in  the  Modoc  war  of  is":!,  and  there  is  now  living  in  the  Comanche tribe  a  woman  who  was  scalped,  though  not  mortally  wounded,  by  white  soldiers  in
one  of  the  later  Indian  encounters  in  Texas.  Authorities:  Drake,  Indians  (for  New
England  wars) ;  Roosevelt,  Virginia  State  Papers,  etc;  (Revolution,  etc. );  Bancroft,
Pacific  States  (Apache);  Official  Report  on  the  Condition  of  the  Indian  Tribes,
1867  (for Chivington  episode);  author's  personal  information.
(22)  Lower  Cherokee  refugees  (p.55):  " In  every  hut  I  have  visited  I  find  the
children  exceedingly  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  white  men,  and  here  [at  Willstown]  a
little  hoy  of  eight  years  old  was  excessively  alarmed  and  could  not  he  kept  from
Screaming  out  until  he  got  out  of  the  door,  and  then  he  ran  and  hid  himself;  lint  as
soon  a-  I  ran  converse  with  them  and  they  are  informed  who  I  am  they  execute  any
order  I  give  them  with  eagerness.  1  inquired  particularly  of  the  mothers  what  could
be  the  reason  for  this.  They  said,  this  town  was  the  remains  of  several  towns  who
[sic]  formerly  resided  on   Tuvalu  and    Keowee.  and  had  been  much  harassed  b)   the
whites;  that  the  old  people  remembered  their  former  situation  and  suffering,  and  fre-
quently spoke  of  them;  that  these  tales  wen-  listened  to  by  the  children,  and  made  an
impression  which  showed  itself  in  the  manner  I  had  observed.  The  women  told
me,  who  I  saw  gathering  nuts,  that  they  had  sensations  upon  my  coming  to  the
camp,  in  the  highest  degree  alarming  to  them,  and  when  I  lit  from  my  horse,  took
them  by  the  hand,  and  spoke  to  them,  they  at  first  could  not  reply,  although  one  of
them    underst   1  and   spoke   English   very  well."  — Hawkins,   manuscript  journal,
1796,  in  library  of  Georgia  Historical  Society.
■  I':;!  General  Alexander  McGilljvray  (p.   "->< ;  > :  This  famous  (reek  chieftain,
like  so  many  distinguished  men  of  the  southern  tribes,  was  of  mixed  hi   1.  being  the
son  of  a  Scotch  trader.  Lachlan  McGillivray,  by  a  halfbreed  woman  of  influential
family,  whose  father  was  a  French  officer  of  Fort  Toulouse.  The  future  chief  was
horn  in  the  Creek   Nation  about  1740,  and  died  at   Pensacola,  Florida,  in  1793.      lie
I'd    ETH— 111   14


210  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ans.19
was  educated  at  Charleston,  studying  Latin  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  branches,  and
after  leaving  school  was  placed  by  his  father  witha  mercantile  firm  in  Savannah,
lh-  remained  but  a  short  time,  when  he  returned  to  the  Creek  country,  where  he  soon
began  to  attract  attention,  becoming  a  partner  in  the  firm  of  Panton,  Forbes  &  Leslie,
of  Pensacola,  which  had  almost  a  monopoly  of  the  Creek  trade.     He  succeeded  to
tl   hieftainship  on  the  death  of  his  mother,  who  came  of  ruling  stock,  but  refused
to  accept  the  position  until  called  to  it  by  a  formal  council,  when  he  assumed  the  title
of  emperor  of  the  Creek  Nation.  His  paternal  estates  having  been  confiscated  by
Georgia  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  he  joined  the  British  side  with  all  his
warriors,  and  continued  to  bea  leading  instigator  in  the  border  hostilities  until  1790,
when  he  visited  New  York  with  a  large  retinue  and  made  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the
United  States  on  In-half  of  his  people.  President  Washington's  instructions  to  the
treaty  commissioners,  in  anticipation  of  this  visit,  state  that  he  was  said  to  possess
great  abilities  and  an  unlimited  influence  over  the  Creeks  and  part  of  the  Cherokee,
and  that  it  was  an  object  worthy  of  considerable  effort  to  attach  him  warmly  to  the
United  States.  In  pursuance  of  this  policy  the  Creek  chiefs  were  entertained  by
the  Tammany  society,  all  the  members  being  in  full  Indian  dress,  at  which  the  vis-
itors wen-  much  delighted  and  responded  with  an  Indian  dance,  while  McGillivray
was  induced  to  resign  Ins  commission  as  colonel  in  the  Spanish  service  for  a  commis-
sion of  higher  grade  in  the  service  of  the  United  States.  Soon  afterward,  on  account
of  some  opposition,  excited  by  Bowles,  a  renegade  white  man,  he  absented   himself
from  his  tribe  for  a  time,  but  wass   i  recalled,  and  continued  to  rule  over  the  Nation
until  his  death.
Mc(  rillivray  appears  to  have  had  a  curious  mixture  of  Scotch  shrewdness,  French
love  of  display,  and  Indian  secretiveness.  He  fixed  bis  residence  at  Little  Talassee,
on  the  Coosa,  a  few  miles  above  the  present  Wetumpka,  Alabama,  where  he  lived  in
a  handsome  house  with  extensive  quarters  for  his  negro  slaves,  so  that  his  place  had
the  appearance  of  a  small  town.  He  entertained  with  magnificence  and  traveled
always  in  state,  as  became  one  who  styled  himself  emperor.  Throughout  the  Indian
wars  he  strove,  so  far  as  possible,  to  prevent  unnecessary  cruelties,  being  noted  for
his  kindness  to  captives;  and  his  last  years  were  spent  in  an  effort  to  bring  teachers
among  Ins  people.  On  the  other  hand,  he  conformed  much  to  the  Indian  customs;
and  be  managed  his  negotiations  with  England,  Spain,  and  the  United  States  with
such  adroitness  that  lie  was  able  to  play  off  one  against  the  other,  holding  commis-
sions by  turn  in  the  service  of  all  three.  Woodward,  who  knew  of  him  by  later
re]  hi  tat  ion,  asserts  positively  that  McGillivray' s  mother  was  of  pure  Indian  blood  and
that  he  himself  was  without  education,  his  letters  having  been  written  for  him  by
Leslie,  of  the  trading  firm  with  which  be  was  connected.  The  balance  of  testimony,
however,  seems  to  leave  no  doubt  that  he  was  an  educated  as  well  as  an  able  man,
whatever  may  have  been  his  origin.  Authorities:  Drake,  American  Indians;  docu-
ments in  American  State  Papers,   Indian  Affairs,   i,   1832;  Pickett,  Alabama,  1896;
Appleton'a  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography;  W   Iward,  Reminiscences,  p.  59  et
passim,  1859.
(24)  Govebnob  John  Sevier  (p.  57):  This  noted  leader  and  statesman  in  the
pioneer  history  of  Tennessee  was  horn  in  Rockingham  county,  Virginia,  in  1745,  and
died  at  the  Creek  town  of  Tukabatchee.  in  Alabama,  in  1815.  His  father  was  a  French
immigrant  of  good  birth  and  education,  the  original  name  of  the  family  being  Xavier.
The  son  received  a  good  education,  and  being  naturally  remarkably  handsome  and
of  polished  manner,  tine  courage,  and  generous  temperament,  soon  acquired  a  remark-
able influence  over  the  rough  border  men  with  whom  his  lot  was  cast  and  among
whom  he  was  afterward  affectionately  known  as  "Chucky  Jack."  To  the  Cherokee
be  was  known  as  Tsan-usdi',  "Little  John."  After  some  service  against  the  Indians
on  the  Virginia  frontier  be  removed  to  the  new  Watauga  settlement  in  Tennessee,
in    1 77-,  and   at   once   became   prominently   identified   with   its  affairs.     He  took


HOPEWELL-     OOL.    BENJ.   HAWKINS  211
pari  in  Dunmore'a  war  in  1771  and,  afterward,  from  the  opening  of  the  Revolution
in  1775  until  tin-  close  of  the  Indian  wars  in  Tennessee  a  period  extending  over
nearly  twentj  years  was  the  acknowledged  leader  or  organizer  in  every  impor-
tant Indian  campaign  along  the  Tennessee  border.     His  services  in  this  connection
have  been  already  noted.     He  also  c   manded  one  wing  of  the  American  forces
al  the  battle  of  King's  mountain  in  1780,  and  in  17s:;  led  a  body  of  mountain  men  to
the  assistance  of  the  patriots  under  Marion.  At  one  time  during  the  Revolution  a
Tory  plot  to  assassinate  bim  was  revealed  by  the  wife  of  the  principal  conspirator.
In  I77!i  he  had  been  commissioned  as  commander  of  the  militia  of  Washington
county,  North  Carolina — the  nucleus  of  the  present  stair  of  Tennessee  -a  position
whirl i  he  had  already  held  by  coi   n  consent.  Shortly  after  the  close  of  the  Revo-
lution lie  Ih'IiI  for  a  short  time  the  office  of  governor  of  the  seceding  "state  of
Franklin."  for  which  he  was  arrested  and  brought  to  trial  by  the  government  of North  Carolina,  but  made  his  escape,  when  the  matter  was  allowed  to  drop.  The
question  of  jurisdiction  was  Snally  settled  in  1790,  when  North  Carolina  ceded  the
disputed  territory  to  the  general  government.  Before  this  Sevier  had  been  commis-
sioned as  brigadier-general.  When  Tennessee  was  admitted  as  a  stair  in  L796  he  was
elected  its  first  (state)  governor,  serving  three  terms,  or  six  years.  In  1803  he  was
again  reelected,  serving  three  more  terms.  In  lsi  l  he  was  elected  to  Congress,  \\  here
he  served  two  terms  and  was  reelected  to  a  third,  but  died  before  he  could  take  his
seat,  having  contracted  a  fever  while  on  duty  as  a  boundary  commissioner  among  the
Creeks,  being  then  in  his  seventy-first  year.  Fur  more  than  forty  years  he  had  been
continuously  in  the  service  of  his  country,  and  no  man  of  his  state  was  ever  mure
loved  and  respected.  In  the  prime  of  his  manhood  he  was  reputed  the  handsomest
man  and  the  best  Indian  fighter  in  Tennessee.
(25)  Hopewell,  Sen  tii  Carolina  (p.  61):  This  place,  designated  in  early  treaties
and  also  in  Hawkins's  manuscript  journal  as  "Hopewell  on  the  Keowee, "  was  the plantation  seat  of  I  reneral  Andrew  Pickens,  who  resided  there  from  the  close  of  the
Revolution  until  his  death  in  1S17.  It  was  situated  on  the  northern  edge  of  the
present  Anderson  county,  on  the  east  side  of  Keowee  river,  opposite  and  a  short
distance  helots  the  entrance  of  Little  river,  and  about  three  miles  from  the  present
Pendleton.  In  sight  of  it,  on  the  opposite  side  of  Keowee,  was  the  old  Cherokee
town  of  Seneca,  destroyed  liv  the  Americans  ill  1  77H.  Important  treaties  were  made
here  with  the  Cherokee  in  17S5,  and  with  the  Chickasaw  in  1786.
(26)  Colonel  Benjamin  Hawkins  (p. 61):  This  distinguished  soldier,  statesman,
and  author,  was  horn  in  Warren  county.  North  Carolina,  in  1754,  and  died  al  llaw-
kinsville,  Georgia,  in  1816.  His  father.  Colonel  Philemon  Hawkins,  organized  and
commanded  a  regiment  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  and  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  ratified  the  national  constitution.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  young
Hawkins  was  a  student  at  Princeton,  hut  offered  his  services  to  the  American  cause,
and  on  account  of  his  knowledge  of  French  and  other  modern  languages  was
appointed  by  Washington  his  staff  interpreter  for  communicating  with  the  French
officers  cooperating  with  the  American  army.  He  took  [part  in  several  engagements
and  was  afterward  appointed  commissioner  for  procuring  war  supplies  abroad.    After
the  close  of  the  war  he  was  elected   to  Congress,  and    in    1785  was   appointed  on    the
commission  which  negotiated  at  Hopewell  the  first  federal  treaty  with  the  Cherokee.
He  served  a  second  term  in  the  House  and  another  in  the  Senate,  and  in  1796  was
appointed  superintendent  for  all  the  Indians  south  of  the  Ohio,  lie  thereupon
removed  to  the  Creek  country  and  established  himself  in  the  wilderness  at  what  is
now  Hawkinsville,  Georgia,  where  he  remained  in  the  continuance  of  his  office
until  his  death.     As  Senator  he  signed  the  deed  by  which  North  Carolina  ceded
Tennessee  to  the  United  States  in  17! HI,  aid  as  Indian  superintendent  helped  to  nego-
tiate seven  different  treaties  with  the  southern  trihos.  lie  ha.  I  an  extensive  know  I
edge  of  the  customs  and   language  of  the   Creeks,    and    his    "Sketch    of    the  Creek


212  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Country,"  written  in  1799  and  published  by  the  Historical  Society  of  Georgia  in
1848,  remains  a  standard.  His  journal  and  other  manuscripts  are  in  possession  of
the  same  society,  while  a  manuscript  Cherokee  vocabulary  is  in  possession  of  the
American  Philosophical  Society  in  Philadelphia.  Authorities:  Hawkins's  manuscripts,
with  Georgia  Historical  Society;  Indian  Treaties,  1837;  American  State  Papers:
Indian  Affairs,  i,  1832;  n,  1884;  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend;  Appleton,  Cyclo-
paedia of  American  Biography.
(27)  Governor  William  Blount  (p.  68):  William  Blount,  territorial  governor  of
Tennessee,  was  born  in  North  Carolina  in  1744  and  died  at  Knoxville,  Tennessee,
in  1800.  He  held  several  important  offices  in  his  native  state,  including  two  terms  in
the  assembly  and  two  others  as  delegate  to  the  old  congress,  in  which  latter  capacity
he  was  .me  of  the  signers  of  the  Federal  constitution  in  1787.  On  the  organization
of  a  territorial  government  for  Tennessee  in  1790,  he  was  appointed  territorial
governor  and  also  superintendent  for  the  southern  tribes,  fixing  his  headquarters
at  Knoxville.  In  1791  he  negotiated  an  important  treaty  with  the  Cherokee,  and
had  much  to  do  with  directing  the  operations  against  the  Indians  until  the  close
of  the  Indian  war.  He  was  president  of  the  convention  which  organized  the  state  of
Tennessee  in  1796,  and  was  elected  to  the  national  senate,  but  was  expelled  on  the
charge  of  having  entered  into  a  treasonable  conspiracy  to  assist  the  British  in  con-
quering Louisiana  from  Spain.  A  United  States  officer  was  sent  to  arrest  him,  but
returned  without  executing  his  mission  on  being  warned  by  Blount's  friends  that
they  would  not  allow  him  to  be  taken  from  the  state.  The  impeachment  proceedings
against  him  were  afterward  dismissed  on  technical  grounds.  In  the  meantime  the
people  of  his  own  state  had  shown  their  confidence  in  him  by  electing  him  to  the
state  senate,  of  which  he  was  chosen  president.  He  died  at  the  early  age  of  fifty-
three,  the  most  popular  man  in  the  state  next  to  Sevier.  His  younger  brother,
Willie  Blount,  who  had  been  his  secretary,  was  afterward  governor  of  Tennessee,
1809-1815.
(28)  St  Clair's  defeat,  1791  (p.  72):  Early  in  1791  Major-General  Arthur  St
Clair,  a  veteran  officer  in  two  wars  and  governor  of  the  Northwestern  Territory,  was
appointed  to  the  chief  command  of  the  army  operating  against  the  Ohio  tribes.  On
November  4  of  that  year,  while  advancing  upon  the  Miami  villages  with  an  army  of
1,400  men,  he  was  surprised  by  an  Indian  force  of  about  the  same  number  under
Little-turtle,  the  Miami  chief,  in  what  is  now  southwestern  Mercer  county,  Ohio,
adjoining  the  Indiana  line.  Because  of  the  cowardly  conduct  of  the  militia  he  was
totally  defeated,  with  the  loss  of  632  officers  and  men  killed  and  missing,  and  263
wounded,  many  of  whom  afterward  died.  The  artillery  was  abandoned,  not  a  horse
being  left  alive  to  draw  it  off,  and  so  great  was  the  panic  that  the  men  threw  away
their  arms  and  fled  for  miles,  even  after  the  pursuit  had  ceased.  It  was  afterward
learned  that  the  Indians  lost  150  killed,  besides  many  wounded.  Two  years  later
General  Wayne  built  Fort  Recovery  upon  the  same  spot.  The  detachment  sent  to
do  the  work  found  within  a  space  of  350  yards  500  skulls,  while  for  several  miles
along  the  line  of  pursuit  the  woods  were  strewn  with  skeletons  and  muskets.  The
two  cannon  lost  were  found  in  the  adjacent  stream.  Authorities:  St  Clair's  report
and  related  documents,  1791;  American  State  I'apers,  Indian  Affairs,  i,  1832;  Drake,
Indians  570,  571,  1880;  Appleton' s  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography.
(29)  Cherokee  clans,  (p.  74):  The  Cherokee  have  seven  clans,  viz:  Ani'-Wa''ya,
Wolf;  Ani'-Kawf,  Deer;  Ani'-Tsi'skwa,  Bird;  Ani'-Wa'dl,  Paint;  Ani'-Saha'ni;
Ani'-Ga'tage'wl;  Ani'-Gila'hI.  The  names  of  the  last  three  can  not  be  translated
with  certainty.  The  Wolf  clan  is  the  largest  and  most  important  in  the  tribe.  It
is  probable  that,  in  accordance  with  the  general  system  in  other  tribes,  each  clan
had  formerly  certain  hereditary  duties  and  privileges,  but  no  trace  of  these  now
remains.  Children  belong  to  the  clan  of  the  mother,  and  the  law  forbidding  mar-
riage between  persons  of  the  same  clan  is  still  enforced  among  the  conservative


koon]  i  w  dyne's  victory  2  1  3
full-bloods.  The  "seven  clans"  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  sacred  formulas,
and  even  in  some  of  the  tribal  laws  promulgated  with  in  the  century  There  is  evi-
dence that  originally  there  were  fourteen,  which  by  extinction  or  absorption  have
been  reduced  to  seven;  thus,  the  ancient  Turtle-dove  and  Raven  clans  now  constitute
a  single  Bird  clan.  The  subject  will  be  discussed  more  fully  in  a  future  Cherokee
paper. 30  Wayne's  victory,  L 794  (p.  78):  Aiter  tbe  successive  failures  of  Harmar  and
si  Clair  in  their  efforts  against  the  Ohio  tribes  the  chief  command  was  assigned,  in
1793,  t"  Major-General  Anthony  Wayne,  who  had  already  distinguished  himself  by
his  fighting  qualities  during  the  Revolution.  Having  built  Fort  Recovery  on  the
site  "i  >t  Clair's  defeat,  he  made  that  post  his  headquarters  through  the  winter
of  1793-94.  In  the  summer  of  1794  he  advanced  down  the  Maumee  with  an  army
of  3,000  men,  two-thirds  of  whom  were  regulars,  tin  August  I'd  he  encountered  the
confederated  Indian  forces  near  the  head  of  the  Maumee  rapids  at  a  point  know  n  as
the  Fallen  Timbers  and  defeated  them  with  great  slaughter,  tbe  pursuit  being  fol-
lowed up  by  the  cavalry  until  the  Indians  took  refuge  under  the  guns  of  the
British  garrison  at  Fort  Miami,  just  below  the  rapids.  His  own  toss  was  only  33
killed  and  100  wounded,  of  w  hom  1 1  afterward  died  of  their  wound-.  The  loss  ofthe
Indians  and  their  white  auxiliaries  was  believed  to  be  more  than  double  this.  The
Indian  force  was  supposed  to  nn ii dier  2,000,  while,  on  account  of  the  impetuosity  oi
Urn  ne'-  charge,  the  number  of  his  troops  actually  engaged  did  not  exceed  900.  On account  of  this  defeat  and  the  subsequent  devastation  of  their  towns  and  fields  by
the  victorious  army  the  Indian-  were  compelled  to  sue  tor  peace,  which  was  granted
by  the  treaty  eon. -hided  at  Greenville,  Ohio,  August  :!.  1795,  by  which  the  trihis
represented  ceded  awaj  nearly  their  whole  territory  in  Ohio.  Authorities.  Wayne's
report  and  related  documents,  1794,  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  i,  1832;
Drake.  Indians,  571-577,  1880;  Greenville  treaty,  in  Indian  Treaties,  1837;  Appleton's
Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography.
(31)  First  things  of  civilization  (p.  83):  We  usually  find  that  the  first  things
adopted  by  the  Indian  from  his  white  neighbor  are  improved  weapons  and  cutting
tools,  with  trinkets  and  articles  of  personal  adornment.  Altera  regular  trade  has
been  established  certain  traders  marry  Indian  wives,  and,  taking  up  their  permanent
residence  in  the  Indian  country,  engage  in  farming  and  stock  raising  according  to
civilized  methods,  thus,  even  without  intention,  constituting  themselves  industrial
teachers  for  the  tribe.
From  data  furnished  by  Haywood,  guns  appear  to  have  been  first  introduced
among  the  ( Iherokee  a  hoi  it  the  year  1700  or  1710,  although  he  himself  puts  the  date
much  earlier.  Horses  were  probably  not  owned  in  any  great  number  before  the
marking  out  of  the  horse-path  for  trader-  from  Augusta  about  1740.  The  Cherokee,
however,  took  kindly  to  the  animal,  and  before  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1760
had  a  "prodigious  number."  In  spite  of  their  great  losses  at  that  time  they  had  so
far  recovered  in  1775  that  almost  every  man  then  had  from  two  to  a  dozen  I  Adair,
p.  231  I.  In  the  border  war-  following  the  Revolution  companies  of  hundred-  of
mounted  Cherokee  and  ('reeks  sometimes  invaded  the  settlements  The  cow  i-
called  wa'ka  by  the  Cherokee  and  maga  by  the  ('reek.-,  indicating  thai  their  first
knowledge  of  it  came  through  the  Spaniards.  Xnttall  states  that  ii  was  first  intro-
duce  long  the  Cherokee  by  the  celebrated  Nancy  Ward  i  Travels,  p.  130).     It  was
not  ill  such  favor  as  the  horse.  hoiiiL'  valuable  chiefly  for  food,  of  which  at  that  time
there  was  an  abundant  supply  from  the  wild  game.  \  potent  reason  for  iis  avoid-
ance was  the  Indian  belief  thai  the  eating  of  the  flesh  oi  a  slow    \  ing  animal  brei  ds
onding  sluggishness  in  the  eater.     The  same  argument  applied  even  more
strongly  to  the  hog,  and  to  this  day  a  few  of  the  old  conservatives  among
Cherokee  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  beef,  pork,  milk,  or  butter.     Nevei
Bartram  tells  of  a  trader  in  the  Cherokee  countrj  a-  earb  a-  1775  who  had  a  stock


214  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
of  cattle,  and  whose  Indian  wife  had  learned  to  make  butter  and  cheese  (Travels,  p.
347).     In  L796  Hawkins  mentions  meeting  two  Cherokee  women  driving  ten  very
fat  cattle  to  market  in  the  white  settlements  (manuscript  journal,  1796).  Bees,  if
not  native,  as  the  Indians  claim,  were  introduced  at  so  early  a  period  that  the
Indians  have  forgotten  their  foreign  origin.  The  De  Soto  narrative  mentions  the
finding  of  a  pot  of  honey  in  an  Indian  village  in  Georgia  in  1540.  The  peach  was
cultivated  in  orchards  a  century  before  the  Revolution,  and  one  variety,  known  as
early  as  I7i«i  as  the  Indian  peach,  the  Indians  claimed  as  their  own.  asserting  that
they  had  had  it  before  the  whites  came  to  America  (  Lawson,  Carolina,  p.  182,  ed.  1860).
Potatoes  were  introduced  early  and  were  so  much  esteemed  that,  according  to  one
old  informant,  the  Indians  in  ( leorgia,  before  the  Removal,  "lived  on  them."  Coffee
came  later,  and  the  same  informant  remembered  when  the  full-bloods  still  consid-
ered it  poison,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  chief,  Charles  Hicks,  to  introduce  it
among  them.
Spinning  wheels  and  looms  were  introduced  shortly  before  the  Revolution.
According  to  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript  the  first  among  the  Cherokee  were  brought
over  from  England  by  an  Englishman  named  Edward  Graves,  who  taught  his
Cherokee  wife  to  spin  and  weave.  The  anonymous  writer  may  have  confounded
this  early  civilizer  with  a  young  Englishman  who  was  employed  by  Agent  Hawkins
in  I  si )  1  to  makewheels  and  looms  for  the  ( 'reeks  i  Hawkins.  1801,  in  American  State
Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  i.  p.  647).     Waff  ord,  in  his  boyh   1,  say  about  1815,  knewan
old  man  named  Tsi'nawi  on  Young-cane  creek  of  Nottely  river,  in  upper  Georgia,
who  was  known  as  a  wheelwright  and  was  reputed  to  have  made  the  first  spinning
w  heel  and  loom  ever  made  among  the  mountain  Cherokee,  or  perhaps  in  the  Nation,
long  before  Watford's  time,  or  "about  the  time  the  Cherokee  began  to  drop  their
silver  ornaments  and  go  to  work."  In  1785  the  commissioners  for  the  Hopewell
treaty  reported  that  some  of  the  Cherokee  women  had  lately  learned  to  spin,  and  many
were  very  desirous  of  instruction  in  the  raising,  spinning,  and  weaving  of  flax,  cotton,
and  wool  (Hopewell  Commissioners'  Report,  1785,  American  State  Papers:  Indian
\  Efa  i  is.  i .  p.  39) .  In  accordance  with  their  recommendation  the  next  treaty  made  with
the  tribe,  in  1791,  contained  a  provision  for  supplying  the  Cherokee  with  farming
tools  (Holston  treaty,  1791,  Indian  Treaties,  p.  36,  1837),  and  this  civilizing  policy
was  continued  and  broadened  until,  in  1801,  their  agent  reported  that  at  the  <  !hero-
kee  agency  the  wheel,  the  loom,  and  the  plow  were  in  pretty  general  use,  and  fann-
ing, manufacturing,  and  stock  raising  were  the  principal  topics  of  conversation  among
men  and  women  (  Hawkins  manuscripts,  Treaty  Commission  of  1801 ).
(32)  Colonel  Return  .1.  Meigs  (  p.  84):  Return  Jonathan  Meigs  was  born  in  Mid-
dletown,  Connecticut,  December  17,  1734,  and  died  at  the  Cherokee  agency  in  Ten-
nessee, January  28,  1823.  He  was  the  first-born  son  of  his  parents,  who  gave  him
the  somewhat  peculiar  name  of  Return  Jonathan  to  commemorate  a  romantic
incident  in  their  own  courtship,  when  his  mother,  a  young  Quakeress,  called  back
her  lover  as  he  was  mounting  his  horse  to  leave  the  house  forever  after  what  he
had  supposed  was  a  final  refusal.  The  name  has  been  handed  down  through  five
generations,  every  one  of  which  has  produced  some  man  distinguished  in  the  pub-
lic service.  The  subject  of  this  sketch  volunteered  immediately  after  the  open-
ing engagement  of  the  Revolution  at  Lexington,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  under
Arnold,  with  rank  of  major.  He  accompanied  Arnold  in  the  disastrous  march
through  the  wilderness  against  Quebec,  and  was  captured  in  the  assault  upon  the
citadel  and  held  until  exchanged  the  next  year.  In  1777  he  raised  a  regiment  and
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  colonel.  For  a  gallant  and  successful  attack  upon  the
enemy  at  Sag  harbor,  Long  island,  he  received  a  sword  and  a  vote  of  thanks  from
I  longress,  and  by  his  conduct  at  the  head  of  hisregimentatStony  point  won  the  favor-
able notice  of  Washington.  After  the  close  of  the  Revolution  he  removed  to  Ohio,
where,  as  a  member  of  the  territorial  legislature,  he  drew  up  the  earliest  code  of  regula-


moosey]  TECUM  111  \  2  1  5
tions  tor  the  pioneer  settlers.     In  1801  he  was  appointed  agent  for  the  Cherokee  and
took  up  his  resident-eat  the  agency  al  Tellico  blockhouse,  opposite  the  month  ofTellico
river,  in  Tennessee,  continuing  to  serve  in  that  capacity  until   his  death.     He  was
!  as  agent  by  Governoi  VIcMinn,  ol  Ti  nnessee.     In  the  course  of  twenty  two
years  he  negotiated  several  treaties  with  the  Cherokee  and  did    eh  to  further  the
work  of  civilization  among  them  and  to  defend  them  against  unjust  aggression.  He
also  wrote  a  journal  of  the  expedition  to  Quebec.  His  grandson  of  the  same  name
was  special  agent  for  the  Cherokee  and  Creeks  in  L834,  afterward  achieving  a  repu
tation  in  the  legal  profession  both  in  Tennesssee  and  in  the  District  of  Columbia.
Authorities:  Appleton,  Cyclopsedia  of  American  Biography,  1894;  Royce,  Cherokee
Nation,  in  Fifth  Annual  Report  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1888;  documents  in  American
stale  Papers,  Indian  Affairs,  i  and  ii.
(33)  Tecumtha  (p.  87):  This  great  chief  of  the  Shawano  and  commander  of  the
allied  northern  tribes  in  the  British  service  was  born  near  the  present  Chillicothe,  in
western  Ohio,  about  1770,  and  fell  in  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  in  Ontario,  October
.  i  -  :  His  name  signifies  a  " flying  panther"  -i.  e.,  a  meteor.  He  came  of  fight-
ing -i.  n'k  g   I  even  in  a  tribe  distinguished  for  its  warlike  qualities,  his  father  ami
elder  brother  having  been  killed  in  battle  with  the  whites.  His  mother  is  said  to  have
died  among  the  Cherokee.  Tecumtha  is  firsl  heard  of  as  taking  part  in  an  engagement
with  the  Kentuckians  when  about  twenty  \  ears  old,  and  in  a  few  years  he  had  secured
recognition  as  the  ablest  leader  among  the  allied  tribes.  It  is  sai<l  that  he  took  part
in  every  important  engagement  with  the  Americans  from  the  time  of  Harmar's  defeat
in  1790  until  the  battle  in  which  he  lost  his  life.     When  about  thirty  years  of  age  he
  iceived  the  idea  .if  uniting  the  tribes  northwest  of  the  ( >lii> >.  as  Pontiac  had  united
them  before,  in  a  great  confederacy  to  resist  the  further  advance  of  the  Americans,
taking  the  stand  that  the  whole  territory  between  the  Ohio  and  the  Mississippi
belonged  to  all  these  tribes  in  common  and  that  no  one  tribe  had  tin-  right  to  sell
any  portion  of  it  without  the  consent  of  the  others.  The  refusal  of  the  government
jo  admit  this  principle  led  him  to  take  active  steps  to  unite  the  tribes  upon  that
basis,  in  which  he  was  seconded  by  his  brother,  the  Prophet,  who  supplemented
Tecumtha's  eloquence  with  his  own  claims  to  supernatural  revelation.  In  the summer  of  1810  Tecumtha  held  a  conference  with  Governor  Harrison  at  Vineennes
to  protest  against  a  recent  treaty  cession,  and  finding  after  exhausting  his  arguments
that  the  effort  was  fruitless,  he  closed  the  debate  with  the  words:  "The  President  is
far  off  and  may  sit  in  his  town  and  drink  his  wine,  but  you  and  I  will  have  to  light
it  out."  Both  sides  at  once  prepared  for  war,  Teeumtlia  going  south  to  enlist  the
aid  of  the  (reek.  Choctaw,  and  other  southern  tribes,  while  Harrison  took  advan-
tage of  hi-  ah-eii  re  to  (one  the  i  —  ue  by  marching  against  the  Prophet's  town  on  the
Tippecanoe  river,  where  the  hostile  warriors  from  a  dozen  trihe-  had  gathered.  A
battle  fought  before  daybreak  of  November  6,  1811,  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  the
Indian-  and  the  scattering  of  their  forces.  Tecumtha  returned  to  find  bis  plans
brought  to  naught  for  the  time,  but  the  opening  of  the  war  between  the  United
states  and  England  a  few  months  later  enabled  him  to  rally  the  confederated  tribes
once  more  to  the  support  of  the  British  against  the  Americans.  As  a  commissioned
brigadier-general  in  the  British  service  he  commanded  2,000  warriors  in  the  war  of
1812,  distinguishing  himself  no  less  by  his  bravery  than  by  his  humanity  in  pre-
venting outrages  and  protecting  prisoners  from  massacre,  at  one  time  saving  the
lives  ol  four  hundred  American  prisoners  who  had  been  taken  in  ambush  near  Fort
Meigs  and  were  unable  to  make  longer  resistance,     lb- was  wounded  at  Maguagua,
where  nearly  four  hundred  were  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides,  lie  covered
the  British  retreat  after  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  and,  refusing  to  retreat    farther,
compelled  the  British  General  Proctoi  to  make  a  stand  at  the  Thames  river.    Al   st
the  whole  force  of  the  American  attack   fell  on  Tecumtha's  division.      Early  in  the


21  <>  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.Aira.19
engagement  he  was  shot  through  the  arm,  but  continued  to  fight  desperately  until
he  received  a  bullet  in  the  head  and  fell  dead,  surrounded  by  the  bodies  of  120  of
his  slain  warriors.  The  services  of  Tecumtha  and  his  Indians  to  the  British  cause
have  been  recognized  by  an  English  historian,  who  says,  "but  for  them  it  is  proba-
ble  we  should  not  now  have  a  Canada."  Authorities:  Drake,  Indians,  ed.  1880;
Appleton's  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography,  1N94;  Eggleston,  Tecumseh  and  the Shaw  nee  Prophet.
(34)  Fort  Minis  Massacre,  1813  (p.  89):  Fort  Minis,  so  called  from  an  old  Indian
trader  on  whose  lands  it  was  built,  was  a  stockade  fort  erected  in  the  summer  of  1813
for  the  protection  of  the  settlers  in  what  was  known  as  the  Tensaw  district,  and  was
situated  on  Tensaw  lake.  Alabama,  one  mile  east  of  Alabama  river  and  about  forty
miles  above  Mobile.  It  was  garrisoned  by  about  200  volunteer  troops  under  Major
Daniel  Beaslev,  with  refugees  from  the  neighboring  settlement,  making  a  total  at
the  time  of  its  destruction  of  553  men.  women,  and  children.  Being  carelessly
guarded,  it  was  surprised  on  the  morning  of  August  30  by  about  1,000  Creek  war-
riors led  by  the  mixed-blood  chief,  William  Weatherford,  who  rushed  in  at  the
open  gate,  and,  after  a  stout  but  hopeless  resistance  by  the  garrison,  massacred  all
within,  with  the  exception  of  the  few  nygroes  and  halfbreeds,  whom  they  spared,
ami  about  a  dozen  whites  who  made  their  escape.  The  Indian  loss  is  unknow  n.  hut
was  very  heavy,  as  the  fight  continued  at  close  quarters  until  the  buildings  were
fired  over  the  heads  of  the  defenders.     The  unfortunate  tragedy  was  due  entirely  to
tl   arelessness  of  the  commanding  officer,  who  had  been  repeatedly  warned  that
the  Indians  were  about,  and  at  the  very  moment  of  the  attack  a  negro  was  tied  up
waiting  to  be  flogged  for  reporting  that  he  had  the  day  before  seen  a  number  of
painted  warriors  lurking  a  short  distance  outside  the  stockade.  Authorities:  Pickett,
Alabama,  ed.  189G;  Hamilton  and  Owen,  note,  p.  170.  in  Transactions  Alabama  His-
torical Society,  n,  1898;  Agent  Hawkins's  report,  1813,  American  State  Papers:  Indian Affairs,  i,  p.  853;  Drake,  Indians,  ed.  1880.  The  figures  given  are  those  of  Pickett,
which  in  this  instance  seem  most  correct,  while  Drake's  are  evidently  exaggerated.
(35)  General  William  McIntosh  (p.  98):  This  noted  halfbreed  chief  of  the
Lower  Creeks  was  the  son  of  a  Scotch  officer  in  the  British  army  by  an  Indian
mother,  ami  was  born  at  the  Creek  town  of  Coweta  in  Alabama,  on  the  lower  Chat-
tahoochee, nearly  opposite  the  present  city  of  Columbus,  Georgia,  and  killed  at
the  same  place  by  order  of  the  Creek  national  council  on  April  30,  1825.  Having
sufficient  education  to  keep  up  an  official  correspondence,  he  brought  himself  to
public  notice  and  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  principal  chief  of  the  Lower  Creeks.
In  the  Creek  war  of  1813-14  he  led  his  warriors  to  the  support  of  the  Americans
against  his  brethren  of  the  Upper  towns,  and  acted  a  leading  part  in  the  terrible
slaughters  at  Autossee  and  the  Horseshoe  bend.  In  1817  he  again  headed  his  war-
riors on  the  government  side  against  the  Seminole  :\nt\  was  commissioned  as  major.
His  common  title  of  general  belonged  to  him  only  by  courtesy.  In  bSL'l  he  was  the
principal  supporter  of  the  treaty  of  Indian  springs,  by  which  a  large  tract  between
the  Flint  and  Chattahoochee  rivers  was  ceded.  The  treaty  was  repudiated  by  the
Creek  Nation  as  being  the  act  of  a  small  faction.  Two  other  attempts  were  made  to
carry  through  the  treaty,  in  which  the  interested  motives  of  Mcintosh  became  so
apparent  that  he  was  branded  as  a  traitor  to  his  Nation  and  condemned  to  deat",
together  with  his  principal  underlings,  in  accordance  with  a  Creek  law  making
death  the  penalty  for  undertaking  to  sell  lands  without  tin-  consent  of  the  national
council.  About  the  same  time  he  was  publicly  exposed  and  denounced  in  the
( 'herokee  council  for  an  attempt  to  bribe  John  Koss  and  other  chiefs  of  the  Cherokee
in  the  same  fashion.  At  daylight  of  April  30,  1825,  a  hundred  or  more  warriors
sen!  by  the  Creek  national  council  surrounded  his  house  and,  after  allowing  the
women  and  children  to  come  out,  set  tire  to  it  and  shot  Mcintosh  and  another  chief


mooneyJ  WILLIAM    WEATHERFORD —  MISSIONARIES  217
us  thej  tried  to  escape.    I  [e  left  three  wives,  one  of  wl   i  was  a  t  Iherokee.      1  uthori-
ties:  Drake,    [ndians,  ed.  L880;  Letters  from   Mcintosh's  son  and   widows,  1825,  in
American  State  Papers:  [ndian  Affairs,  n,  pp.  764  and  768.
(36  \Vuii\m  Weatherford  p.89):  This  leader  of  the  hostiles  in  the  Creek
war  was  the  son  of  a  white  father  and  a  halfbreed  woman  of  Tuskegee  town  whose
father  had  been  a  Scotchman.  VVeatherford  was  born  in  the  Creek  Nation  about
L780and  died  on  Little  river,  in  Monroe  county,  Alabama,  in  1826.  He  caine  first
into  prominence  by  leading  the  attack  upon  Fort  Minis,  August  30,  1813,  which
resulted  in  the  destruction  of  the  fori  and  the  massacre  of  over  five  hundred  inmates.
It  is  maintained,  with  apparent  truth,  that  he  <li'l  his  best  to  prevent  the  excesses
which  followed  tin-  victory,  and  left  the  scene  rather  than  witness  the  atrocities
when  he  found  that  he  could  not  restrain  his  followers.  The  fact  that  Jackson
allowed  him  to  go  home  unmolested  after  the  final  surrender  is  evidence  that  he
believed  Weatherford  guiltless.  At  the  battle  of  the  Holy  Ground,  in  the  following
December,  he  was  defeated  and  narrow  l\  escaped  capture  by  the  troops  under  i  ten-
eral  Claiborne.  When  the  last  hope  of  the  Creeks  had  been  destroyed  and  their
power  of  resistance  broken  by  the  bloody  battle  of  the  Horseshoe  bend,  March  27,
1814,  Weatherford  voluntarily  walked  into  General  Jackson's  headquarters  and  sur-
rendered, creating  such  an  impression  by  his  straightforward  and  fearless  manner
that  the  general,  after  a  friendly  interview .  allowed  him  to  go  back  alone  to  gather
up  his  people  preliminary  to  arranging  terms  of  peace.  Alter  the  treaty  he  retired
to  a  i 'latitat  ion  in  Monroe  county,  where  he  lived  in  comfort  ami  was  greatly  respected
by  his  white  neighbors  until  hisdeath.  As  an  illustration  of  his  courage  it  istold  how
he  once,  single-handed,  arrested  two  murderers  immediately  after  the  crime,  when  the
local  justice  and  a  large  crowd  of  bystanders  were  afraid  to  approach  them.  Jackson
declared  him  to  be  as  high  tone.]  and  tearless  as  any  man  lie  had  ever  met.  In  person
he  was  tall,  straight,  and  well  proportioned,  with  features  indicating  intelligence,
bravery,  and  enterprise.  Authorities:  Pickett,  Alabama,  ed.  1896;  Drake.  Indians,
ed.  1880;  Woodward,  Reminiscences,  1859.
(37)  Reverend  David  Brainerd  (p.  104):  The  pioneer  American  missionary
from  whom  the  noted  Cherokee  mission  took  its  name  was  born  at  Haddam,  Con-
necticut, April  20,  1718,  and  died  at  Northampton,  Massachusetts.  October  9,  17)7.
He  entered  Yale  college  in  1739,  but  was  expelled  on  account  of  his  religious  opinions.
In  1741'  he  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  and  the  next  year  began  work  as  missionary  to
the  Mahican  Indians  of  the  village  of  Kaunameek,  twenty  miles  from  Stockbridge,
Massachusetts,  lie  persuaded  them  to  remove  to  Stockbridge,  where  he  put  them
in  chargeof  a  resident  minister,  after  which  he  took  up  work  with  good  result  among
the  Delaware  and  other  tribes  on  the  Delaware  and  Susquehanna  rivers.  In  1717
his  health  failed  and  he  was  forced  to  retire  to  Northampton,  where  he  died  a
few  months  later.  He  wrote  a  journal  and  an  account  of  his  missionary  labors  at
Kaunameek.  His  later  mission  work  was  taken  up  and  continued  by  his  brother.
Authority:     Appleton's  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography,  1894.
38  Reverend  Samuel  Austin  Worcester  (p.  105):  This  noted  missionary  and
philologist,  the  son  of  a  Congregational  minister  who  was  also  a  printer,  was
born  at  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  January  19,  1798,  and  died  at  Dark  Hill,  in  the
Cherokee  Vat  ion  west.  April  2D.  1859.  Having  removed  to  Vermont  with  his  father
while  still  a  child,  he  graduated  with  the  honors  of  his  class  at  the  state  university
at  Burlington  in  1819,  and  after  finishing  a  course  at  the  theological  seminari  at
Andover  was  ordained  to  the  ministrj  in  1825.  A  week  later,  withhisnewh  wedded
bride,  he  left  Boston  to  begin  mission  work  among  the  Cherokee,  and  arrived  in
October  at  the  mission  of  the  American  hoard,  at  Brainerd,  Tennessee,  where  he
remained  until  the  end  of  1827.  He  then,  with  his  wife,  removed  to  Sew  Echota,in
i  leorgia,  the  capital  of  the  <  Iherokee  Nation,  w  here  he  was  the  principal  worket
establishment  of  tl  Ph(enix,  the  first  newspaper  printed  in  the  Chei


218  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anx.19
language  and  alphabet.  Iii  this  labor  his  inherited  printer's  instinct  came  into  play,
for  he  himself  supervised  the  casting  of  the  new  types  and  the  systematic  arrangement
of  them  in  the  case.  In  March,  1831,  he  was  arrested  by  the  <  leorgia  authorities  for
refusing  to  take  a  special  oath  of  allegiance t<  i  the  state.  1  [e  was  released,  but  was  rear-
rested soon  afterward,  confined  in  the  state  penitentiary,  and  forced  to  wear  prison
garb,  until  January,  1833,  notwithstanding  a  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States,  nearly  a  year  before,  that  his  imprisonment  was  a  violation  of  the  law
of  tin.'  land.  The  Cherokee  Phcenix  having  been  suspended  and  the  Cherokee  Nation
brought  into  disorder  by  the  extension  over  it  of  the  state  laws,  lie  then  returned  to
Brainerd,  which  was  beyond  the  limits  of  Georgia.  In  1835  he  removed  to  the  Indian
Territory,  whither  the  Arkansas  ( Jherokee  had  already  gone,  and  after  short  sojourns
at  Dwight  and  Union  missions  took  up  his  final  residence  at  Park  Hill  in  December,
1S30.  He  had  already  set  up  his  mission  press  at  Union,  printing  both  in  the  (  Siero-
kee  and  the  Creek  languages,  and  on  establishing  himself  at  Park  Hill  lie  began  a
regular  series  of  publications  in  the  Cherokee  language.  In  1843  he  states  that  "at
Park  Hill,  besides  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  a  leading  object  of  attention  is  the  p rep-
aration and  publication  of  books  in  the  Cherokee  language"  (Letter  in  Report  of
Indian  ( lommissioner,  p.  356,  1843  i.  The  list  of  his  Cherokee  publications  Hirst  edi-
tions) under  his  own  name  in  Pilling' s  Bibliography  comprises  about  twenty  titles,
including  the  Bible,  hymn  1   ks,  tracts,  and  almanacs  in  addition  to  the  Phasnix
and  large  number  of  anonymous  works.  Says  Pilling:  "It  is  very  probable  that  he
was  the  translator  of  a  number  of  books  for  which  he  is  not  given  credit  here,  espe-
cially those  portions  of  the  Scripture  which  are  herein  not  assigned  to  any  name.
Indeed  it  is  safe  to  say  that  during  the  thirty-four  years  of  his  connection  with  the
Cherokee  but  little  was  done  in  the  way  of  translating  in  which  he  had  not  a  share."
He  also  began  a  ( Iherokee  geography  and  had  both  a  grammar  and  a  dictionary  of
the  language  under  way  when  his  work  was  interrupted  by  his  arrest.  The  manu-
scripts, with  all  his  personal  effects,  afterward  went  down  with  a  sinking  steamer  on
the  Arkansas.  His  daughter,  Mrs  A.  E.  W.  Robertson,  became  a  missionary  among
the  Creeks  and  has  published  a  number  of  works  in  their  language.  Authorities:
Pilling,  bibliography  of  the  Iroquoian  languages  (articles  Worcester,  Cherokee
Phienix,  etc.  i,  1SSS;  Drake,  Indians,  ed.  1880:  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  1843
(  Worcester  letter).
i  Mil)  Death  penalty  for  selling  lands  (p.  107):  In  1820  the  Cherokee  Nation
enacted  a  law  making  it  treason  punishable  with  death  to  enter  into  any  negotiation
for  the  sale  of  tribal  lands  without  the  consent  of  the  national  council.  A  similar
law  was  enacted  by  the  (  reeks  at  about  the  same  time.  It  was  for  violating  these  laws
that  Mcintosh  and  Ridge  suffered  death  in  their  respective  tribes.  The  principal
parts  of  the  Cherokee  law,  as  reenacted  by  the  united  Nation  in  the  West  in  1s4l'.
appear  as  follows  in  the  compilation  authorized  in  1800:
"An  act  against  sale  of  land,  etc.:  Whereas,  The  peace  and  prosperity  of
Indian  nations  are  frequently  sacrificed  or  placed  in  jeopardy  by  the  unrestrained
cupidity  of  their  own  individual  citizens;  and  whereas,  we  ourselves  are  liable  to  suffer
from  the  same  cause,  and  be  subjected  to  future  removal  and  disturbances:  There-
fore, .  .  .
"Be  it  further  rnitrt.nl,  That  any  person  or  persons  who  shall,  contrary  to  the  will
and  consent  of  the  legislative  council  of  this  nation,  in  general  council  convened,
enter  into  a  treaty  with  any  commissioner  or  commissioners  of  the  United  States,  or
any  officer  or  officers  instructed  for  the  purpose,  and  agree  to  fi^\t\  exchange,  or  dis-
pose in  any  way  any  part  or  portion  of  the  lands  belonging  to  or  claimed  by  the
Cherokees,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  he  or  they  so  offending,  upon  conviction  before
any  judge  of  the  circuit  or  supreme  courts,  shall  suffer  death,  and  any  of  the  afore-
said judges  are  authorized  to  call  a  court  for  the  trial  of  any  person  or  persons
So  transgressing.


mooney]  THE    CHEROKEE    SYLLABARY  219
■•  /;.  Itfurlhei  enacted,   rhat  am  person  or  persons  who  shall  violate  the  pj
of  the  second  section  of  this  act,  and  shall  resist  or  refuse  to  appear  at   the  place
designated  for  trial,  or  ahsi   1,  are  hereby  declared  to  be  outlaws;  ami  any  person
or  persons,  citizens  of  this  nation,  may  kill  him  or  them  so  offending  at  am  time
and  in  any  manner  most  convenient,  within  the  limits  of  this  nation,  and  shall  not
be  held  aci   itable  to  the  laws  for  the  same.
i  nacted,  That  no  treaty  shall  be  binding  upon  this  nation  which  shall
not  be  ratified  by  the  general  council,  and  approved  by  the  principal  chief  of  the
nation.     December2,  1842."   -Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  1868.
i11  I'n r  I  in  i;nk t  i  syllabari  (p.  110):  lii  the  various  schemes  of  symbolic
thought  representation,  from  the  simple  pictograph  of  the  primitive  man  to  the  fin-
ished alphabet  of  the  civilized  nations,  our  own  system,  although  not  yet  perfect,
stands  at  the  head  of  the  list,  the  result  of  three  thousand  years  of  development  by
Egyptian,  Phoenician,  and  Greek.  Sequoya's  syllabary,  the  unaided  work  of  an
uneducated  Indian  reared  amid  semisavage  surroundings,  stands  second.
Twelve  years  of  his  life  are  said  to  have  been  given  to  his  great  work.  Being  entirely
without  instruction  and  ha\  ing  no  knowledge  of  the  philosophy  of  language,  being  not
evi  ii  acquainted  with  English,  his  first  attempts  were  naturally  enough  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  crude  Indian  pictograph.  He  set  out  to  devise  a  symbol  for  each  word  of
the  language,  and  after  several  years  oi  experiment,  finding  this  an  utterly  hopeless
task,  he  threw  aside  the  thousands  of  characters  which  he  hail  carved  or  scratched
uiion  pieces  of  bark,  and  started  in  anew  to  study  the  constructii   f  the  language
it-elf.  By  attentive  observation  for  another  long  period  lie  finally  discovered  that
the  sounds  in  the  words  used  by  the  ( Iherokee  in  their  daily  conversation  and  their
public  speeches  could  be  analyzed  and  elassitied,  and  that    the  thousands  of   possible
Is  were  all  formed  fr    varying  combinations  of  hardly  more  than  a  hundred
distinct  syllables;  Having  thoroughly  tested  his  discovery  until  satisfied  of  its  cor-
rectness, he  next  proceeded  to  formulate  a  symbol  for  each  syllable.  For  this  purpose
he  made  use  of  a  number  of  characters  which  he  found  in  an  old  English  spelling
book,  picking  out  capitals,  lower-case,  italics,  and  figures,  and  placing  them  right  side
up  or  upside  down,  without  any  idea  of  their  sound  or  significance  as  used  in  English
(see plate  v).  Having  thus  utilized  some  thirty-live  ready-made  characters,  to  which
must  be  added  a  dozen  or  more  produced  by  modification  of  the  same  originals,  he
•  1 1 •> i o   l  from  his  own  imagination  as  many  more  as  were  necessary  to  his  purpose,
making  eighty-five  in  all.  The  complete  syllabary,  as  first  elaborated,  would  have
required  someone  hundred  and  fifteen  characters,  but  after  much  hard  study  over
the  hissing  sound  in  its  various  combinations,  be  hit  upon  the  expedient  of  repre-
senting the  sound  by  means  of  a  distinct  character  the  exact  equivalent  of  our  letter
.v — whenever  it  formed  the  initial  of  a  syllable.  Says  Gallatin,  "  It  wanted  bin  one
step  more,  and  to  have  also  given  a  distinct  character  to  each  consonant,  to  reduce
the  whole  number  to  sixteen,  and  to  have  had  an  alphabet  similar  to  ours.  In  prac-
tice, however,  and  as  applied  to  his  own  language,  the  superiority  of  (  riie-s's  alphabet
is  manifest,  and  has  been  fully  proved  by  experience.  Yon  must  indeed  learn  and
remember  eighty-five  characters  instead  of  twenty-five  [sic].  But  this  once  accom-
plished, the  education  of  the  pupil  is  completed;   be  can  read  and  he  i>  perfect  in  his
orthography  without  making  it  the  subject  ofadistinct  study.     The  boy  learns  in  a
few  weeks  that  which  occupies  two  years  of  the  time  of  ours."  Says  Phillips:  "  In
my  own  observation  Indian  children  will  take  .me  or  two.  at  time-  several,  j  ears  to
master  the  English  printed  and  written  language,  but  in  a  few  days  can  read  and
write  in  Cherokee.      They  do  the  latter,  in  fact,  as  soon  as  thos  learn  to  shape  letters.
\-  soon  as  they  master  the  alphabet  they  have  got  rid  of  all  the  perplexing  questions
in  orthography  that  puzzle  the  brains  of  our  children.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say-
that  a  child  will  learn  in  a  month,  by  the  same  effort,  as  thoroughly  in  the  language


220  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [kth.axn.19
of  Sequoyah,  that  which  in  ours  consumes  the  time  of  our  children  for  at  least  two
years." Although  in  theory  the  written  Cherokee  word  has  one  letter  for  each  syllable,  the
rule  does  not  always  hold  good  in  practice,  owing  to  the  frequent  elision  of  vowel
sounds.  Thus  the  word  for  "soul"  is  written  with  four  letters  as  arda-ntifi-ta,,  but
pronounced  in  three  syllables,  mlnnta.  In  the  same  way  tui'i-li'in-i-yurtti  ("like
tobacco,"  the  cardinal  flower)  is  pronounced  tsdliyusCl.  There  are  also,  as  in  other
languages,  a  number  of  minutesound  variations  not  indicated  in  the  written  word,
so  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  heard  the  language  spoken  in  order  to  read  with  cor-
rect pronunciation.  The  old  Upper  dialect  is  the  standard  to  which  the  alphabet
has  been  adapted.  There  is  no  provision  for  the  r  of  the  Lower  or  the  sh  of  the
Middle  dialect,  each  speaker  usually  making  his  own  dialectic  change  in  the  reading.
The  letters  of  a  word  are  not  connected,  and  there  is  no  difference  between  the  written
and  the  printed  character.  Authoritirx:  Gallatin,  Synopsis  of  the  Indian  Tribes,  in
Trans.  Am.  Antiq.  Soc,  n,  1836;  Phillips,  Sequoyah,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  Septem- ber, 1870;  Filling,  Bibliography  of  Iroquoian  Languages  i  article  on  Guess  and  plate
of  syllabary),  1888;  author's  personal  information. 1]  Southern  gold  fields  (p.  116):  Almost  every  valuable  mineral  and  crystal
known  to  the  manufacturer  or  the  lapidary  is  found  in  the  southern  Alleghenies,
although,  so  far  as  present  knowledge  goes,  but  few  of  these  occur  in  paying  quanti-
ties. It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  estimate  may  change  with  improved  methods
and  enlarged  railroad  facilities.  Leaving  out  of  account  the  earlier  operations  by  the
Spanish,  French,  and  English  adventurers,  of  which  mention  has  already  been  made,
the  first  authentic  account  of  gold  finding  in  any  of  the  states  south  of  Mason  and
Dixon's  line  within  what  may  lie  called  the  American  period  appears  to  be  that
given  by  Jefferson,  writing  in  1781,  of  a  lump  of  ore  found  in  Virginia,  which  yielded
seventeen  penny  weights  of  gold.  This  was  probably  not  the  earliest,  however,  as
we  find  doubtful  references  to  gold  discoveries  in  both  Carolinas  before  the  Revolu-
tion. The  first  mint  returns  of  gold  were  made  from  North  Carolina  in  17'.':;.  ami
from  South  Carolina  in  1829,  although  gold  is  certainly  known  to  have  been  found  in
tin-  latter  state  some  years  earlier.  The  earliest  gold  records  for  the  other  southern
states  are.  approximately,  Georgia  (near  Dahlonega).  IkI.VIsl'O;  Alabama,  1830;
Tennessee  ildco  creek.  Monroe  county),  1831;  Maryland  (Montgomery  county),
1849.  Systematic  tracingof  gold  belts  southward  from  North  Carolina  began  in  1829,
anil  speedily  resulted  in  the  forcible  eviction  of  the  Cherokee  from  the  gold-bearing
region.  Most  of  the  precious  metal  was  procured  from  placers  or  alluvial  deposits
by  a  simple  process  of  digging  and  washing.  Very  little  quartz  mining  has  yet  been
attempted,  and  that  usually  by  the  crudest  methods.  In  fact,  for  a  long  period  gold
working  was  followed  as  a  sort  of  side  issue  to  farming  between  crop  seasons.  In
North  Carolina  prospectors  obtained  permission  from  the  owners  of  the  land  to  wash
or  dig  on  shares,  varying  from  one-fourth  to  one-half,  and  the  proprietor  was  accus-
tomed to  put  his  slaves  to  work  in  the  same  way  along  the  creek  bottoms  after  the
crops  had  been  safely  gathered.  "The  dust  became  a  considerable  medium  of  circu-
lation, and  miners  were  accustomed  to  carry  about  with  them  quills  tilled  with  gold,
and  a  pair  of  small  hand  scales,  on  which  they  weighed  out  gold  at  regular  rates;  for
instance,  Si  grains  of  gold  was  the  customary  equivalent  of  a  pint  of  whisky."  For
a  number  of  years,  about  1830  ami  later,  a  man  named  Bechtler  coined  gold  on  his
own  account  in  North  Carolina,  and  these  coins,  with  Mexican  silver,  are  said  to  have
constituted  the  chief  currency  over  a  large  region.  A  regular  mint  was  established
at  Dahlonegain  1838  and  maintained  for  some  years.  From  1804  to  1827  all  the  gold
produced  in  the  United  States  came  from  North  <  'arolina.  although  the  total  amounted
to  hut  SH0,000.  The  discovery  of  the  rich  deposits  in  California  checked  mining
operations  in  the  south,  and  the  civil  war  brought  about  an  almost  complete  suspen-


EXTENSION    OF    GEORGIA    LAWS  221
siim,  from  which  then'  is  hardly  yet  a  revival.  According  to  the  best  official  esti-
mates the  gold  production  of  the  southern  Allegheny  region  for  the  century'from  I7;t9 to  1898,  inclusive,  has  been  s   ething  over  $46,000,000,  distributed  as  follows:
North  Carolina    $21,926,376
( ;.•. >rgia    16,  658,  630
South  Carolina    3,961,863
Virginia,  slightly  in  excess  of    3,216,343
Alabama,  slightly  in  excess  of    437,927
Tennessee,  slightly  in  excess  of    167,405
Maryland    17,068
Total,  slightly  in  excess  of       46,  415,612
Autiiorities:  Becker,  Gold  Fields  of  the  Southern  Appalachians,  in  the  Sixteenth
Annual  Report  United  States  Geological  Survey.  1895;  Day,  Mineral  Resources  of
the  United  States,  Seventeenth  Annual  Report  United  States  Geological  Survey,
part  ■"..  1896;  Nitze,  Gold  Mining  and  Metallurgy  in  the  Southern  States,  in  North
Carolina  Geological  Survey  Report,  republished  in  Mineral  Resources  of  the  t  nited
states,  Twentieth  Annual  Report  United  states  Geological  Survey,  part  6,  1899;
Lanman,  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  1849.
(42)  Extension  of  Georgia  laws,  L830(p.ll7):  "It  is  hereby  ordained  that  all
the  laws  of  Georgia  are  extended  over  the  Cherokee  cQuntry;  that  after  the  first  day  of
June,  1830,  all  Indians  then  and  at  that  time  residing  in  said  territory,  shall  be  liable
and  subject  to  such  laws  and  regulations  as  the  legislature  may  hereafter  prescribe;
that  all  laws,  usages,  and  customs  made  and  established  and  enforced  in  the  sai'l  terri-
tory, by  the  saiil  Cherokee  Indians,  lie,  ami  the  same  are  hereby,  on  ami  after  the
1st  day  of  .lime.  1830, declared  null  ami  void;  ami  no  Indian,  or  descendant  of  an
Indian,  residing  within  the  ( 'reek  or  Cherokee  nations  of  Indians,  shall  he  deemed
a  competent  witness  or  party  to  any  suit  in  any  court  where  a  white  man  is  a  defend-
ant."—  Extract  from  the  act  passed  by  the  Georgia  legislature  on  December  20,  1828,
"to  add  the  territory  within  this  state  and  occupied  by  the  Cherokee  Indians  to
the  counties  of  DeKalb  et  al.;  and  to  extend  the  laws  of  this  state  over  the  s   ,"
Authorities:  Drake.  Indians,  p.  439,  ed.  1880;  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation  of  Indians,  in
Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  260,  1888.
13  Removal  ports,  1838  (p.130):  For  collecting  the  Cherokee  preparatory  to
the  Removal,  the  follow  ing  stockade  forts  were  built:  In  North  Carolina.  Fort  Lind-
say, on  the  south  side  of  the  Tennessee  river  at  the  junction  of  Nantahala.  in  Swain
county:  Fort  Scott. at  Aquone,  farther  up  Nantahala  river,  in  Macon  county;  Fort
Montgomery,  at  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county;  Fort  Hembrie,  at  Hayesville,  in
Clay  county:  Fort  Delaney,  at  Yalleytown,  in  Cherokee  county;  Fort  Butler,  at
Murphy,  in  tin- same  county.  In  Georgia,  Fort  Scudder,  on  Frogtown  creek,  north
of  Dahlonega,  in  Lumpkin  county;  Fort  Gilmer,  near  Ellijay,  in  Gilmer  county;
Fort  Coosawatee,  in  Murray  county;  Fort  Talking-rock,  near  Jasper,  in  Pickens
county;  Fort  Buffington,  near  Canton,  in  Cherokee  county.  In  Tennessee,  Fort
( lass,  a!  ( 'alhoun.  on  Hiwassee  river,  in  McMinn  county.  In  Alabama,  Fort  Turkey-
town,  on  Coosa  river,  at  Center,  in  Cherokee  county.  Authority:  Author's  personal information.
I  44  Mi  Nair's  GRAVE,  (p.  132):  Just  inside  the  Tennessee  line,  where  the  Cona-
sauga  river  bends  again  into  Georgia,  is  a  stone-walled  grave,  with  a  slab,  on  which
is  an  epitaph  which  tells  its  own  story  of  the  Removal  heartbreak.  McNair  was  a
white  man,  prominent  in  the  Cherokee  Nation,  whose  wife  was  a  daughter  of  the
chief,  Vann,  who  welcomed  the   Moravian  missionaries  and  gave  his  own    house  for
their  use.    The  date  shows  that  she  died  while  tin-  Removal  was  in  progress,  possibly


222  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  leth.ann.19
while  waiting  in  the  stockade  camp.     The  inscription,  with  details,  is  given  from
information  kindly  furnished  by  Mr  D.  K.  Dunn  of  Conasauga,  Tennessee,  in  a
letter  dated  August  16, 1890:
"Sacred  to  the  memory  of  David  and  DelilahA.  McNair,  who  departed  this  life,  the
former  on  tlir  15th  of  August,  L836,  and  the  latter  on  the  30th  of  November,  L838.
Their  children,  being  members  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  and  having  to  go  with  their
j ico] ili'  to  the  West,  do  leave  this  i   lument,  not  only  to  show  their  regard  for  their
parents,  but  to  guard  their  sacred  ashes  against  the  unhallowed  intrusion  of  the  white
man." (45)  President  Samuel  Houston,  (p.  145) :  This  remarkable  man  was  horn  in  Rock-
bridge  county,  Virginia,  March  2,  1793,  and  died  at  Huntsville,  Texas,  July  25,  1863.
( if  strangely  versatile,  but  forceful,  character,  he  occupies  a  unique  position  in  Ameri-
can history,  combining  in  a  wonderful  degree  the  rough  manhood  of  the  pioneer,
the  eccentric  vanity  of  the  Indian,  the  stern  dignity  of  the  soldier,  the  genius  of  the
statesman,  and  withal  the  high  chivalry  of  a  knight  of  the  olden  time.  His  erratic
career  has  been  the  subject  of  much  cheap  romancing,  hut  the  simple  facts  are  of
sufficient  interest  in  themselves  without  the  aid  of  fictitious  embellishment.  To  the
Cherokee,  whom  he  loved  so  well,  lie  was  known  as  Ka'lanu,  "The  Raven,"  an  old war  title  in  the  tribe.
His  father  having  died  when  the  boy  was  nine  years  old.  his  widowed  mother  re-
moved with  him  to  Tennessee,  opposite  the  territory  of  the  Cherokee,  whose  boundary
was  then  the  Tennessee  river.  Here  he  worked  on  the  farm,  attending  school  at
intervals;  lint,  being  of  adventurous  disposition,'  he  left  home  when  sixteen  years  old, and,  crossing  over  the  river,  joined  the  Cherokee,  among  whom  he  soon  became  a
great  favorite,  being  adopted  into  the  family  of  Chief  Jolly,  from  whom  the  island  at
the  mouth  of  Hiwassee  takes  its  name.  After  three  years  of  this  life,  during  which
time  he  wore  the  Indian  dress  and  learned  the  Indian  language,  he  returned  to  civili-
zation and  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  under  Jackson  in  the  Creek  war.     He  s   i
attracted  favorable  notice  and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  ensign.  By  striking
bravery  at  the  bloody  battle  of  Horseshoe  bend,  where  he  scaled  the  breastworks  with
an  arrow  in  bis  thigh  and  led  his  men  into  the  thick  of  the  enemy,  he  won  the  last-
ing friendship  of  Jackson,  who  made  him  a  lieutenant,  although  he  was  then  barely
twenty-one.  He  continued  in  the  army  after  the  war,  serving  for  a  time  as  subagent
for  the  Cherokee  at  Jackson's  request,  until  the  summer  of  1818,  when  he  resigned
on  account  of  some  criticism  by  Calhoun,  then  Secretary  of  War.  An  official  investi-
gation, held  at  his  demand,  resulted  in  his  exoneration.
Removing  to  Nashville,  he  began  the  study  of  law,  and,  being  shortly  afterward
admitted  to  the  liar,  set  up  in  practice  at  Lebanon.  Within  five  years  he  was  succes-
sively district  attorney  and  adjutant-general  and  major-general  of  state  troops.  In
1823  he  was  elected  to  ( '.ingress,  serving  two  terms,  at  the  end  of  which,  in  1827,  he
was  elected  governor  of  Tennessee  by  an  overwhelming  majority,  being  then  thirty-
four  years  of  age.  Shortly  before  this  time  he  had  fought  and  wounded  General  White
in  a  duel.  In  January,  L829,  he  married  a  young  lady  residing  near  Nashville,  but
two  months  later,  without  a  word  of  explanation  to  any  outsider,  he  left  her,  resigned
his  governorship  ami  other  official  dignities,  and  left  the  state  forever,  to  rejoin  his
old  friends,  tin- Cherokee,  in  the  West.  For  years  the  reason  for  this  strange  conduct
was  a  secret,  and  Houston  himself  always  refused  to  talk  of  it,  but  it  is  now  under-
stood to  have  been  due  to  the  fact  that  his  wife  admitted  to  him  that  she  loved
another  and  had  only  been  induced  to  marry  him  by  the  over-persuasions  of  her
parents.
From  Tennessee  he  went  to  Indian  Territory,  whither  a  large  part  of  the  Cher-
okee had  already  removed,  and  once  more  took  up  his  residence  near  Chief  Jolly,
who  was  now  the  principal  chief  of  the  western  Cherokee.  The  great  disap-
pointment which  seemed  to  have  blighted  his  life  at  its  brightest  was  heavy  at  his


SAMUEL    BOUSTOM  'J'-'-'?
heart,  and  he  sought  forgetfulness  in  drink  to  such  an  extent  that  for  a  time  his
manl   I  seemed  to  have  departed,  notwithstanding  which,  such  was  his  force  of
character  and  his  past  reputation,  he  retained  his  hold  upon  the  affections  of  the
Cherokee  and  his  standing  with  the  officers  and  their  families  at  the  neighboring  posts
of  Fort  Smith,  F"rt  i  iibson,  and  Fort  ( loffee.    In  the  meantime  his  former  w  ife  in  Den
nessee  had  obtained  a  divorce,  and  Houston  being  thus  frei   e  more  soon  after
married  Talihina,  the  youngest  daughter  of  a   prominent  mixed-bl   I  Cherokee
named  Rogers,  who  resided  near  Fort  Gibson.  She  was  the  niece  of  Houston's
adopted  father,  Chief  Jolly,  and  he  had  known  her  when  a  boy  in  the  old  Nation.
Being^a  beautiful  girl,  and  educated  above  her  surroundings,  she  became  a  welcome
guest  w  herever  her  husband  was  received.  He  started  a  trading  store  near  Webbers
Falls,  but  continued  in  his  dissipated  habits  until  recalled  to  his  senses  by  the  out-
come of  a  drunken  affray  in  which  he  assaulted  his  adopted  father,  the  old  chief,
and  was  himself  felled  to  the  ground  unconscious.  Upon  recover}  from  his  injuries
he  made  a  public  apology  for  his  <   luct  and  thenceforward  led  asoberlife.
In  1832  he  visited  Washington  in  the  interest  >it'  the  western  Cherokee,  calling  in
Indian  costume  upon  President  Jackson,  who  received  him  with  old-time  friendship.
Being  accused  while  there  of  connection  with  a  fraudulent  Indian  contract,  he
administered  a  severe  beating  to  his  accuser,  a  member  of  Congress.  For  this  he
»;i-  lined  $500  and  reprimanded  by  the  bar  of  the  House,  but  Jackson  remitted  the
fine.  Soon  after  his  return  to  the  West  he  removed  to  Texas  to  take  part  in  the
agitation  just  started  against  Mexican  rule.  He  was  a  member  oi  the  convention
w  hich  adopted  a  separate  constitution  for  Texas  in  1833,  and  two  years  later  aided  in
forming  a  provisional  government,  and  was  elected  commander-in-chief  to  organize
the  new  militia.  In  1836  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  which  declared  the
independence  of  Texas.  At  the  battle  of  San  Jacinto  in  April  of  that  year  hedefeated
with  7.">n  men  Santa  Ana's  army  of  1,800,  inflicting  upon  the  Mexicans  the  terrible loss  oi  630  killed  and  730  prisoners,  among  whom  was  Santa  Ana  himself.  Houston
received  a  severe  wound  in  the  engagement.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he
was  elected  first  president  of  the  republic  of  Texas,  receiving  more  than  four-fifths
of  the  Vote-  cast.  He  served  two  years  and  retired  at  the  end  of  his  term,  leaving
the  country  on  good  terms  with  both  Mexico  and  the  Indian  tribes,  and  with  its
note-  at  par.  He  was  immediately  elected  to  the  Texas  congress  and  served  in  that
capacity  until  1841,  when  he  was  reelected  president.  It  was  during  these  years  that
he  made  his  steadfast  fight  in  behalf  of  the  Texas  <  Iherokee,  as  is  narrated  elsew  here,
supporting  their  cause  without  wavering,  at  the  risk  of  his  own  popularity  and  posi-
tion.    He  frequently  declared  that  no  treaty  made  and  carried  out  in  t:   1  faith  had
ever  I. ecu  violated  by  Indians.  His  Cherokee  w  ife  having  died  some  time  1. el  ore.  he
was  again  married  in  ls4o.  this  time  to  a  lady  from  Alabama,  who  exercised  over
him  a  restraining  and  ennobling  influence  through  the  stormy  vicissitudes  of  his
eventful  life.  In  June,  1842,  he  vetoed  a  hill  making  him  dictator  for  the  purpose  of
resisting  a  threatened  invasion  from  Mexico.
(>n  December  29,  1845,  Texas  was  admitted  to  the  Union,  and  in  the  following
March  Houston  was  elected  to  the  Senate,  where  he  served  continuously  until  1859,
when  he  resigned  to  take  his  -eat  as  governor,  to  which  position  he  had  just  been
elected.  From  1852  to  1860  bis  name  was  three  times  presented  before  national
presidential  nominating  conventions,  the  last  time  receiving  57  votes.  He  had  taken
issue  with  the  Democratic  majority  throughout  his  term  in  the  Senate,  and  when
Texas  passed  the  secession  ordinance  in  February,  1861,  being  an  uncompromising
Union  man,  he  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Confederacy  and  was
accordingly  deposed  from  the  office  of  governor,  declining  the  proffered  aid  of  federal
troops  to  keep  him  in  his  seat.     Unwilling  either  to  fight  against  the  Union  orto
take  -ides  against  his  friends,  he  held  aloof  from  the  great  Struggle,  and  remained  m
silent  retirement  until  his  death,  two  years  later.     No  other  man  in  American  history


224  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.1W
has  left  such  a  record  of  continuoua  election  to  high  office  while  steadily  holding  to
hisown  convictions  in  the  faceof  strong  popular  opposition.  Antlmntii-s:  Appleton's
Cyclopaedia  of  American  Biography,  1894;  Bonnell,  Texas,  1840;  Thrall,  Texas,  L876;
I.ossing.  Field  Book  of  the  War  of  1812,  1869;  author's  personal  information;  various
periodical  and  newspaper  articles.
(46)  Chief  John  Ross  (p.  151):  This  great  chief  of  the  Cherokee,  whose  name  is
inseparable  from  their  history,  was  himself  but  one-eighth  of  Indian  blood  and  showed
little  of  the  Indian  features,  his  father,  Daniel  Ross,  having  emigrated  from  Scotland
before  the  Revolution  and  married  a  quarter-blood*  Iherokee  woman  whose  fat  her,  John
McDonald,  was  also  from  Scotland.  He  was  horn  at  or  near  the  family  residence  at
Rossville,  Georgia  just  across  the  line  from  Chattanooga,  Tennessee.  As  ahoy,  he
was  known  among  the  Cherokee  as  Tsan-usdi',  "  Little  John,"  but  after  arriving  at
manhood  was  called  Guwi'sguwi',  the  name  of  a  ran-  migratory  bird,  of  large  size
and  white  or  grayish  plumage,  said  to  have  appealed  formerly  at  long  intervals  in
the  old  Cherokee  country.  It  may  have  been  the  egret  or  the  swan.  He  was
educated  at  Kingston,  Tennessee,  and  began  his  public  career  when  barely  nineteen
years  of  age.  Ilis  first  wife,  a  full-blood  Cherokee  woman,  died  in  consequence  of
the  hardships  of  the  Removal  while  on  the  western  march  and  was  buried  at  Little
Rock,  Arkansas.  Some  years  later  he  married  again,  this  time  to  a  Miss  Stapler  of
Wilmington,  Delaware,  the  marriage  taking  place  in  Philadelphia  (author's  per- sonal information  from  Mr  Allen  Ross,  son  of  John  Ross;  see  also  Meredith,
"The  Cherokees,"  in  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Extra  Bulletin  Eleventh  Census,
1S94. )  Cooweescoowee  district  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  west  has  been  named  in  his
honor.  The  following  biographic  facts  are  taken  from  the  panegyric  in  his  honor,
passed  by  the  national  council  of  the  Cherokee,  on  hearing  of  his  death,  "as  feebly
expressive  of  the  loss  they  have  sustained."
John  Ross  was  born  October  .'!,  1790,  and  died  in  the  city  of  Washington,  August
1,  1866,  in  the  seventy-sixth  year  of  his  age.  His  official  career  began  in  1809,  when
he  was  intrusted  by  Agent  Return  Meigs  with  an  important  mission  to  the  Arkansas
Cherokee.  From  that  time  until  the  close  of  his  life,  with  the  exception  of  two  or
three  years  in  the  earlier  part,  he  was  in  the  constant  service  of  his  people,  "furnish-
ing an  instance  of  confidence  on  their  part  and  fidelity  on  his  which  has  never  been
surpassed  in  the  annals  of  history."  In  the  war  of  1813-14  against  the  Creeks  he
was  adjutant  of  the  Cherokee  regiment  which  cooperated  with  General  Jackson,  and
was  present  at  the  battle  of  the  Horseshoe,  where  the  Cherokee,  under  Colonel
Morgan,  of  Tennessee,  rendered  distinguished  service.  In  1817  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  national  committee  of  the  Cherokee  council.  The  first  duty  assigned
him  was  to  prepare  a  reply  to  the  United  States  commissioners  who  were  present
for  the  purpose  of  negotiating  with  the  Chen  ikee  for  their  lands  east  of  the  Mississippi,
in  firm  resistance  to  which  he  was  destined,  a  few  years  later,  to  test  the  power  of
truth  and  to  attain  a  reputation  of  no  ordinary  character.  In  1819,  October  26,  his
name  first  appeals  on  the  statute  book  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  as  president  of  the
national  committee,  and  is  attached  to  an  ordinance  which  looked  to  the  improve-
ment of  the  Cherokee  people,  providing  for  the  introduction  into  the  Nation  of  school-
masters, blacksmiths,  mechanics,  and  others.  He  continued  to  occupy  that  position
till  1826.  In  1827  he  was  associate  chief  with  William  Hicks,  and  president  of  the  con-
vention which  adopted  the  constitution  of  that  year.  That  constitution,  it  is  believed,
is  the  first  effort  at  a  regular  government,  with  distinct  branches  and  powers  defined,
ever  madeand  carried  intoeffect  by  any  of  the  Indians  of  North  America.  From  1828
until  the  removal  west,  he  was  principal  chief  of  the  eastern  Cherokee,  and  from
1839  to  the  time  of  his  death,  principal  chief  of  the  united  Cherokee  Nation.
In  regard  to  the  long  contest  which  culminated  in  the  Removal,  the  resolutions
declare  that  "The  Cherokees,  with  John  Ross  at  their  head,  alone  with  their
treaties,  achieved  a  recognition  of  their  rights,  but  they  were  powerless  to  enforce


booney]  JOHN    ROSS — THE    KETOOWAH    SOCIETV  225
them.  They  were  compelled  to  yield,  but  not  until  the  struggle  had  developed  the
highest  qualities  of  patience,  fortitude,  and  tenacity  of  right  and  purpose  on  their
part,  as  well  as  that  of  their  chief.  The  same  may  be  said  of  their  course  after  their
removal  to  this  country,  and  Which  resulted  in  the  reunion  of  the  eastern  and  west-
em  I  Iherokees  as  one  i   pie  and  in  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitution."
Concerning  the  events  of  the  civil  war  and  the  official  attempt  to  depose  Ross  from
his  authority,  they  state  that  thes   'currences,  with  many  others  in  their  trying
historj  as  a  people,  are  confidently  committed  to  the  future  page  of  the  historian.
••It  is  enough  to  know  that  the  treaty  negotiated  at  Washington  in  1866  hore  the
full  and  just  recognition  of  John  Hoss'  name  as  principal  chief  of  the  Cherokee
nation." The  summing  up  of  the  [panegyric  is  a  splendid  tribute  to  a  splendid  maul   I:
"  Blessed  with  a  line  constitution  and  a  vigorous  niind,  John  Koss  had  the  physi-
cal ability  to  follow  the  path  of  duty  wherever  it  led.  No  danger  appalled  him.
He  never  faltered  in  Supporting  what  he  believed  to  he  right,  hut  clung  to  it  with  a
steadiness  of  purpose  which  alone  could  have  sprung  from  the  clearest  convictions
of  rectitude.  He  never  sacrificed  the-  interests  of  his  nation  to  expediency,  lie
never  lost  sight  of  the  welfare  of  the  people.  For  them  he  labored  daily  for  a  long
life,  and  upon  them  he  bestowed  his  last  expressed  thoughts.  A  friend  of  law,  he
obeyed  it:  a  friend  of  education,  he  faithfully  encouraged  schools  throughout  the
country,  and  spent  liberally  his  means  in  conferring  it  upon  others.  Given  to  hos-
pitality, none  ever  hungered  around  his  door.  A  professor  of  the  Christian  religion,
he  practiced  its  precepts.  His  works  are  inseparable  from  the  history  of  the  Cher-
okee people  for  nearly  half  a  century,  while  his  example  in  the  daily  walks  of  life
will  linger  in  the  future  and  whisper  words  of  hope,  temperance,  and  charity  in  the
years  i  if  posterity." Resolutions  were  also  passed  for  bringing  his  body  from  Washington  at  the  expense
of  the  Cherokee  Nation  and  providing  for  suitable  obsequies,  in  order  "that  his
remains  should  rest  among  those  he  so  long  served"  (Resolutions  in  honor  of  John
Ross,  in  Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  1869).
(47)  The  Ketoowah  Society  (p.  l.MS):  This  Cherokee  secret  society,  which  has
recently  achieved  some  newspaper  prominence  by  its  championship  of  Cherokee
autonomy,  derives  its  name — properly  Kitu'hwa,  hut  commonly  spelled  Ketoowah
in  English  print — from  the  ancient  town  in  the  old  Nation  which  formed  the  nucleus  of
the  most  conservative  element  of  the  tribe  and  sometimes  gave  a  name  to  the  Nation
itself  i  see  KUu'hwatfl,  under  Tribal  Synonyms).  A  strong  band  of  comradeship,  if
not  a  regular  society  organization,  appears  to  have  existed  among  the  warriors  and
leading  men  of  the  various  settlements  of  the  Kituhwa  district  from  a  remote  period,
so  that  the  name  is  even  now  used  in  councils  as  indicative  of  genuine  Cherokee
feelingjn  its  highest  patriotic  form.  When,  some  years  ago,  delegates  from  the
western  Nation  visited  the  East  Cherokee  to  invite  them  to  join  their  more  pros-
perous brethren  beyond  the  Mississippi,  the  speaker  for  the  delegates  expressed
their  fraternal  feeling  for  their  separated  kin-men  by  saying  in  his  opening  speech,
"We  are  all  Kituhwa  people"  (Ani'-KItu'hwagl).  The  Ketoowah  society  in  the
(  In  rokee  Nation  west  was  organized  shortly  before  the  civil  war  by  John  I'..  Jones,
son  of  the  missionary,  Evan  Jones,  and  an  adopted  citizen  of  the  Nation,  as  a  secret
society  for  the  ostensible  purpose  of  cultivating  a  national  feeling  among  the  full-
bl   Is.  in  opposition  to  the  innovating  tendencies  of  the  mixed-bl   1  element.     The
real  purpose  was  to  counteract  the  influence  of  the  "Blue  Lodge"  and  other  secret
secessionist  organizations  among  the  wealthier  slave-holding  classes,  made  up  chiefly
of  mixed-bl   Is  and  whites.      It  extended  to  the  Creeks,  and  its  members  ill  both
tribes   rendered  g   1  service  to  the  Union  cause  throughout  the  war.     The)  were
frequently  known  as  "Pin  Indians,"  for  a  reason  explained  below.  Since  the  close
of  the  great  struggle  tin-  society  has  distinguished  itself  by  its  determined  opposition
I'd    KTH— 01   15


22*1  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
to  every  scheme  looking  i"  the  curtailment  or  destruction  of  <  Sherokee  national  self-
government.
The  6  illowing  account  of  the  society  was  written  shortly  after  the  close  of  the  civil
war:
"Those  ( Sherokees  who  were  loyal  to  the  Union  combined  in  a  secret  organization
for  self-protection,  assuming  the  designation  of  the  Ketoowha  society,  which  name
was  s   i  merged  in  that  of  "Pins."     The  Pins  were  so  styled  because  of  a  peculiar
manner  they  adopted  of  wearing  a  pin.  The  symbol  was  discovered  by  their  ene-
mies, w  ho  applied  the  term  in  derision;  but  it  was  accepted  by  this  loyal  league,  and
has  almost  superseded  the  designation  which  its  members  first  assumed.  The  Pin
organization  originated  among  the  members  of  the  Baptist  congregation  at  Peavine,
Going-snake  district,  in  the  Cherokee  nation.  In  a  short  time  the  society  counted
nearly  three  thousand  members,  and  had  commenced  proselytizing  the  Creeks,
when  the  rebellion,  against  which  it  was  arming,  preventing  its  further  extension,
the  | mi n-  ('reeks  having  been  driven  into  Kansas  by  the  rebels  of  the  Golden  Circle.
Dining  the  war  the  Pins  rendered  services  hi  the  Union  cause  in  many  bloody
encounters,  as  has  been  acknowledged  by  our  generals.  It  was  distinctly  an  anti-
slavery  organization.  The  slave-holding  Cherokees,  who  constituted  the  wealthy
and  more  intelligent  class,  naturally  allied  themselves  with  the  South,  while  loyal
Cherokees  became  more  and  more  opposed  to  slavery.  .This  was  shown  very  clearly
when  the  loyalists  lirst  met  in  convention,  in  February,  1863.  They  not  only  abol-
ished slavery  unconditionally  and  forever,  before  any  slave  state  made  a  movement
toward  emancipation,  but  made  any  attempts  at  enslaving  a  grave  misdemeanor.
The  scent  signs  of  the  Pins  were  a  peculiar  way  of  touching  the  hat  as  a  salutation,
particularly  when  they  were  too  far  apart  for  recognition  in  other  ways.  They  had
a  peculiar  mode  of  taking  hold  of  the  lapel  of  the  coat,  first  drawing  it  away  from
the  body,  and  then  giving  it  a  motion  as  though  wrapping  it  around  the  heart.
During  the  war  a  portion  of  them  were  forced  into  the  rebellion,  but  quickly  rebelled
against  General  Cooper,  who  was  placed  over  them,  and  when  they  fought  against
that  general,  at  Bird  Creek,  they  wore  a  bit  of  corn-husk,  split  into  strips,  tied  in
their  hair.  In  the  night  when  two  Pins  met,  and  one  asked  the  other,  'Who  are
you?'  the  reply  or  pass  was,  'Tahlequah — who  are  you'.''  The  response  was,  'I
am  Kctoowha's  son.'" — Dr  D.  J.  MacGowan,  Indian  Secret  Societies,  in  Historical
Magazine,  x,  1866.
(4s  i  Farewell  address  of  Lloyd  Welch  (p.  175):  In  the  sad  and  eventful  history
of  the  Cherokee  their  gifted  leaders,  frequently  of  white  ancestry,  have  oftentimes
spoken  tii  the  world  with  eloquent  words  of  appeal,  of  protest,  or  of  acknowledgment,
but  never  more  eloquently  than  in  the  last  farewell  of  Chief  Lloyd  Welch  to  the
eastern  band,  as  he  felt  the  end  draw  near  I  leaflet,  MacGowan,  Chattanooga  [n.d.,
L880]  i:
"To  the  Chairman  and  Council  of  tlu  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokees:
"  My  Brothers:  It  becomes  my  imperative  duty  to  bid  you  an  affectionate  fan-well,
and  resign  into  your  hands  the  trust  you  so  generously  confided  to  my  keeping,  prin-
cipal chief  of  the  Eastern  Land.  It  is  with  great  solicitude  and  anxiety  for  your
welfare  that  I  am  constrained  to  take  this  course.  But  the  inexorable  laws  of
nature,  and  the  rapid  decline  of  my  health,  admonish  me  that  soon,  very  soon,  I
will  have  passed  from  earth,  my  body  consigned  to  the  tomb,  ni\  spirit  to  God  who
gave  it,  in  that  happy  home  in  the  beyond,  where  there  is  no  sickness,  no  sorrow,
no  pain,  no  death,  but  one  eternal  joy  and  happiness  forever  more.
"The  oid\   regret   that  I  feel  for  thus  being  so  soon  called  from  among  you,  at  the
meridian  of  manh   1,  when  hope  is  sweet,  is  the  great  anxiety  1  have  to  serve  and
benefit  my  race.  For  this  I  have  studied  and  labored  for  the  past  ten  years  of  my
life,  to  secure  to  my  brothers  equal  justice  from  their  brothers  of  the  west  and  the
United   States,    and   that   you  would   no   longer  be   hewers  of   w   1  and   drawers  of


FAREWELL    ADDRESS    OF    LLOYD    WELCH  227
water,  but  assume  thai  proud  position  among  the  civilized  nations  of  the  earth
intended  by  the  Creator  that  we'should  occupy,  and  which  in  the  near  future  you
w  ill  take  or  I"-  exterminated.  When  you  become  educated,  as  a  natural  consequence
you  will  become  more  intelligent,  sober,  industrious,  and  prosperous
■■  1 1  ha-  been  the  aim  of  ii iv  lit".-.  1 1 ir  chief  object,  to  serve  my  race  faithfully,  hon-
estly, ami  to  tin-  best  of  my  ability.  II""  well  1  have  succeeded  I  will  leave  i"  his-
tory and  your  magnanimity  to  decide,  trusting  an  all-wise  ami  just  God  to  guide  and
protect  you  in  the  future,  as  lie  will  do  all  things  well.  We  may  fail  w  hen  mi  earth
to  see  the  goodness  ami  wisdom  of  God  in  removing  from  us  our  best  ami  mosl  use-
ful men,  but  when  we  have  crossed  over  i  ill  the  i  it  her  shore  to  Our  happy  ami  eternal
Inline  in  the  far  beyond  then  our  eyes  will  be  opened  and  we  will  he  enabled  to  see
ami  realize  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God  in  thus  afflicting  us  while  here  mi  earth,
ami  will  he  enabled  inure  fully  to  praise  <  rod,  from  whom  all  blessings  come.
"I  hope  that  when  you  come  to  select  one  from  among  you  to  take  the  responsible
position  of  principal  chief  of  your  ha  ml  you  will  lay  aside  all  persi  ma  I  considerations
and  seleet  one  in  every  respect  competent,  without  stain  on  his  fair  fame,  a  pure,
mil ile,  honest,  man — one  who  loves  God  ami  all  that  is  pure — with  intellect  sufficient
to  know  your  rights,  independence  ami  nerve  to  defend  them.  Should  you  he  thus
fortunate  in  making  your  choice, all  will  he  well.  It  has  been  truthfully  said  that
'when  the  righteous  rule  the  people  rejoice,  but  when  the  wicked  rule  the  people
mourn.'
■1  am  satisfied  that  you  have  among  you  many  who  are  fully  competent  of  tin-
task.  If  I  was  satisfied  it  was  your  wish  ami  for  the  good  of  my  brothers  I  might
mention  some  of  them,  hut  think  it  best  to  leave  you  in  the  hands  of  an  all-wise  God,
who  does  all  things  right,  to  guide  ami  direct  you  aright.
"Ami  now.  my  brothers,  in  taking  perhaps  my  last  farewell  on  earth  I  do  pray
God  that  you  may  so  conduct  yourselves  while  here  on  earth  that  when  the  last  sail
rite  i-  performed  by  loved  friends  we  may  compose  one  unbroken  family  above  in
that  celestial  city  from  whose  bourne  no  traveler  has  ever  returned  to  describe  the
beauty,  grandeur,  and  happiness  of  the  heaven  prepared  for  the  faithful  by  God  him-
self beyond  the  sky.  And  again,  my  brothers,  permit  me  to  bid  you  a  fond,  hut
perhaps  a  last,  farewell  on  earth,  until  we  meet  again  where  parting  is  never  known
and  friends  meet  to  part  no  more  forever. "L.  R.  "Welch,
"Principal  Chief  Eastern  Band  Cherokei  Indians. "  Witness:
"Samuel  W.  Davidson.
"B.  E.  Mkrony."
(49)  Status  of  eastern  BAND  i]>.  180):  For  some  reason  all  authorities  who  have
hitherto  discussed  the  status  of  the  eastern  band  of  Cherokee  seem  to  have  been
entirely  unaware  of  the  enactment  of  the  supplementary  articles  to  the  treaty  of  New
Echota,  by  which  all  preemption  and  reservation  rights  granted  under  the  twelfth
article  were  canceled.  Thus,  in  the  Cherokee  case  of  "The  United  States  etal  against
D.  T.  Boyd  it  nl,"  we  And  the  United  States  circuit  judge  quoting  the  twelfth  article
in  its  original  form  as  a  basis  for  argument,  while  his  associate  judge  says:  "Their
forefathers  availed  themselves  of  a  provision  in  the  treaty  of  New  Echota  and
remained  in  the  state  of  North  Carolina."  etc.  (Report  of  Indian  Commissionei  lor
1895,  pp.  633-635,  1896).  The  truth  is  that  the  treaty  as  ratified  with  its  supplemen-
tary articles  canceled  the  residence  right  of  every  Cherokee  east  of  the  Mississippi,
and  it  was  not  until  thirty  years  afterwards  that  North  ( 'arolina  finally  gave  assurance
that  the  eastern  band  would  he  permitted   to  remain  within  her  borders.
The  twelfth  article  ..f  the  new  Echota  treaty  of  December  29,  1835,  provides  for  a
pro  rata  apportionment  to  such  Cherokee  as  desire  to  remain  in  the  East,  and  con-


228  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eih.ann.19
tinues:  "Such  heads  of  Cherokee  families  as  are  desirous  to  reside  within  the  states
of  North  Carolina,  Tennessee,  and  Alabama,  subject  to  the  laws  of  the  same,  and
who  are  qualified  or  calculated  to  become  useful  citizens,  shall  be  entitled,  on  the
certificate  of  the  commissioners,  to  a  preemption  right  to  one  hundred  and  sixty
acres  of  land,  or  one  quarter  section,  at  the  minimum  Congress  price,  so  as  to  include
the  present  buildings  or  improvements  of  those  who  now  reside  there;  and  such  as
do  not  live  there  at  present  shall  be  permitted  to  locate  within  two  years  any  lands
not  already  occupied  by  person's  entitled  to  preemption  privilege  under  this  treaty," etc.  Article  13  defines  terms  with  reference  to  individual  reservatii  ins  granted  under
former  treaties.  The  preamble  to  the  supplementary  articles  agreed  upon  on  March
1,  1836,  recites  that,  "Whereas  the  President  of  the  United  States  has  expressed  his
determination  not  to  allow  any  preemptions  or  reservations,  his  desire  being  that  the
whole  Cherokee  people  should  remove  together  and  establish  themselves  in  the
country  provided  for  them  west  of  the  Mississippi  river  (article  1) :  It  is  therefore
agreed  that  all  preemption  rights  and  reservations  provided  for  in  articles  12  and  13
shall  be,  and  are  hereby,  relinquished  and  declared  void."  The  treaty,  in  this  shape,
was  ratified  on  May  23,  1836  (see  Indian  Treaties,  pp.  633-648,  1837).


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    XI
SWIMMER     'A'YUN'INii




Hi— STORIES  AND  STORY  TELLERS
Cherokee  myths  may  be  roughly  classified  as  sacred  myths,  animal
stories,  local  legends,  and  historical  traditions.  To  the  first  class
belong  the  genesis  stories,  dealing  with  the  creation  of  the  world,  the
nature  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  elemental  forces,  the  origin  of  life
and  death,  the  spirit  world  and  the  invisible  beings,  the  ancient  mon-
sters, and  the  hero-gods.  It  is  almost  certain  that  most  of  the  myths
of  this  class  are  but  disjointed  fragments  of  an  original  complete  gen-
esis and  migration  legend,  which  is  now  lost.  With  nearly  every  tribe
that  has  been  studied  we  find  such  a  sacred  legend,  preserved  by  the
priests  of  the  tradition,  who  alone  are  privileged  to  recite  and  explain
it.  and  dealing  with  the  origin  and  wanderings  of  the  people  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  the  final  settlement  of  the  tribe  in  its  home
territory.  Among  the  best  examples  of  such  genesis  traditions  are
those  recorded  in  the  Walam  Olum  of  the  Delawares  and  Matthews'
Navaho  Origin  Legend.  Others  may  be  found  in  Cusick's  History
of  the  Six  Nations,  Gatschet's  Creek  Migration  Legend,  and  the
author's  Jicarilla Genesis.1  The  Cheyenne,  Arapaho,  and  other  plains
tribes  are  known  to  have  similar  genesis  myths.
The  former  existence  of  such  a  national  legend  among  the  Cherokee
is  confirmed  by  Haywood,  writing  in  1823,  who  states  on  information
obtained  from  a  principal  man  in  the  tribe  that  they  had  once  a  long
oration,  then  nearly  forgotten,  which  recounted  the  history  of  their
wanderings  from  the  time  when  they  had  been  first  placed  upon  the
earth  by  some  superior  power  from  above.  Up  to  about  the  middle
of  the  la-t  century  this  tradition  was  still  recited  at  the  annual  Green-
corn  dance.2  Unlike  mosl  Indians  the  Cherokee  are  not  conservative,
and  even  before  the  Revolution  had  so  far  lost  their  primitive  customs
from  contact  with  the  whites  that  Adair,  in  1775.  calls  them  a  nesl  of
apostate  hornets  who  for  more  than  thirty  years  had  been  fast  degen-
erating.3 Whatever  it  may  have  been,  their  national  legend  is  now  lost
forever.  The  secret  organizations  that  must  have  existed  formerly
among  the  priesthood  have  also  disappeared,  and  each  man  now  works
independently  according  to  his  individual  gifts  and  knowledge.
The  sacred  myths  were  not  for  every  one,  but  only  those  might  hear
who  observed  the  proper  form  and  ceremony.      When  John  Ax  and
■American  Anthropologist,  vol.  xi.  July.  1898.  3 Adair,  American  Indians,  p. 81,  ITT"'. 2  See  page  20.


230  MYTHS    OK    THE    CHEROKEE
other  old  men  were  boys,  now  some  eighty  years  ago.  the  myth-keepers
and  priests  were  accustomed  to  meet  toe-ether  at  night  in  the  asl.
or  low-built  log  .sleeping  house,  to  recite  the  traditions  and  discuss
their  secret  knowledge.  At  times  those  who  desired  instruction  from
an  adept  in  the  sacred  lore  of  the  tribe  met  him  by  appointment  in  the
as?,  where  they  sat  up  all  night  talking,  with  only  the  light  of  a  small
tire  burning  in  the  middle  of  the  floor.  At  daybreak  the  whole  party
went  down  to  the  running  stream,  where  the  pupils  or  hearers  of  the
myths  stripped  themselves,  and  were  scratched  upon  their  naked  skin
with  a  bone-tooth  comb  in  the  hands  of  the  priest,  after  which  they
waded  out,  facing  the  rising  sun,  and  dipped  seven  times  under  the
water,  while  the  priest  recited  prayers  upon  the  bank.  This  purifica-
tory rite,  observed  more  than  a  century  ago  by  Adair,  is  also  a  part  of
the  ceremonial  of  the  ballplay,  the  Green-corn  dance,  and,  in  fact,
every  important  ritual  performance.  Before  beginning  one  of  the
stories  of  the  sacred  class  the  informant  would  sometimes  suggest
jokingly  that  the  author  first  submit  to  being  scratched  and  "go  to
water." As  a  special  privilege  a  boy  was  sometimes  admitted  to  the  asl  on
such  occasions,  to  tend  the  fire,  and  thus  had  the  opportunity  to
listen  to  the  stories  and  learn  something  of  the  secret  rites.  In  this  way
John  Ax  gained  much  of  his  knowledge,  although  he  does  not  claim
to  be  an  adept.  As  he  describes  it,  the  tire  intended  to  heat  the  room —
for  the  nights  are  cold  in  the  Cherokee  mountains — was  built  upon  the
ground  in  the  center  of  the  small  house,  which  was  not  high  enough
to  permit  a  standing  position,  while  the  occupants  sat  in  a  circle  around
it.  In  front  of  the  tire  was  placed  a  large  flat  rock,  and  near  it  a  pile
of  pine  knots  or  splints.  When  the  tire  had  burned  down  to  a  bed  of
coals,  the  boy  lighted  one  or  two  of  the  pine  knots  and  laid  them  upon
the  rock,  where  they  blazed  with  a  bright  light  until  nearly  consumed,
when  others  were  laid  upon  them,  and  so  on  until  daybreak.
Sometimes  the  pine  splints  were  set  up  crosswise,  thus,  >0<XX,  in  a
circle  around  the  fire,  with  a  break  at  the  eastern  side.  They  were
then  lighted  from  one  end  and  burned  gradually  around  the  circle,
fresh  splints  being  set  up  behind  as  those  in  front  were  consumed.
Lawson  describes  this  identical  custom  as  witnessed  at  a  dance  among
the  Waxhaw,  on  Catawba  river,  in  1701:
Now,  to  return  to  our  state  house,  whither  we  were  invited  by  the  grandees.  As
seen  as  we  came  into  it,  they  placed  our  Englishmen  near  the  king,  it  being  my  for-
tune to  sit  next  him,  having  his  great  general  or  war  captain  on  my  other  hand.
The  house  is  as  dark  as  a  dungeon,  and  as  hot  as  one  of  the  Dutch  stoves  in  Holland.
They  had  made  a  circular  Are  of  split  canes  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  it  was  one
man's  employment  to  add  more  split  reeds  to  the  one  end  as  it  consumed  at  the
other,  there  Vicing  a  small  vacancy  left  to  supply  it  with  fuel.1
i  Lawson,  Carolina,  67-68,  reprint  1860.


THE    MYTHIC    ANIMALS  231
belong  tlic  shorter  animal  myths,  which  have
lost  whatever  sacred  character  they  may  once  have  had,  and  are  told
now  merely  as  hu   rous  explanations  of  certain  animal  peculiarities.
While  the  >acred  myths  have  a  constant  bearing  upon  Eormulistic
prayers  and  observances,  it  is  only  in  cure  instances  thai  any  rite  or
custom  is  based  upon  an  animal  myth.  Moreover,  the  sacred  myths
are  know  n  as  a  rule  only  to  the  professional  priests  or  conjurers,  while
the  shorter  animal  stories  are  more  or  less  familiar  to  nearly  every-
one and  are  found  in  almost  identical  form  among  Cherokee,  Creeks,
and  other  southern  tribes.
The  animals  of  the  Cherokee  myths,  like  the  traditional  hero-gods,
were  larger  and  of  more  perfect  type  than  their  present  representa-
tives. They  had  chiefs,  councils,  and  townhouses,  mingled  with
human  kind  upon  terms  of  perfect  equality  and  spoke  the  same
language.  In  some  unexplained  manner  they  finally  lefi  this  lower
world  and  ascended  to  Galun'lati,  the  world  above,  where  they  still
exist.  The  removal  was  not  simultaneous,  hut  each  animal  chose  his
own  time.  The  animals  that  we  know,  small  in  size  and  poor  in  intel-
lect, came  upon  the  earth  later,  and  are  not  the  descendants  of  the
mythic  animals,  hut  only  weak  imitations.  In  one  or  two  special  eases.
however,  the  present  creature  is  the  descendant  of  a  former  monster.
Tree-  and  plants  also  were  alive  and  could  talk  in  the  old  days,  and
had  their  place  in  council,  but  do  not  figure  prominently  in  the  myths.
Each  animal  had  his  appointed  station  and  duty.  Thus,  the  Wala'si
frog  was  the  marshal  and  leader  in  the  council,  while  the  Rabbit  was
the  messenger  to  carry  all  public  announcements,  and  usually  led  the
dance  besides.  He  was  also  the  great  trickster  and  mischief  maker,  a
character  which  he  bears  in  eastern  and  southern  Indian  myth  gener-
ally, as  well  as  in  the  southern  negro  stories.  The  bear  figures  as
having  been  originally  a  man,  with  human  form  and  nature.
As  with  other  tribes  and  countries,  almost  every  prominent  rock  and
mountain,  every  dec])  bend  in  the  river,  in  the  old  Cherokee  country
has  its  accompanying  legend.  It  may  be  a  little  story  that  can  he
told  in  a  paragraph,  to  account  for  some  natural  feature,  or  it  may  be
one  chapter  of  a  myth  that  has  its  sequel  in  a  mountain  a  hundred
mile-  away.  As  is  usual  when  a  people  has  lived  for  a  long  time  in
the  same  country,  nearly  every  important  myth  is  localized,  thus
assuming  more  definite  character.
There  is  the  usual  number  of  anecdotes  and  stories  of  personal
adventure,  some  of  them  irredeemably  vulgar,  but  historical  traditions
are  strangely  wanting.  The  authentic  records  of  unlettered  peoples
are  short  at  best,  seldom  going  back  much  farther  than  the  memories
of  their  oldest  men;  and  although  the  Cherokee  have  been  the  most
important  of  the  southern  tribes,  making  wars  and  treaties  for  three
centuries  with   Spanish.   English,  French,  and  Americans.   Iroquois,


232  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth. ANN.  19
Shawano,  Catawba,  and  Creeks,  there  is  little  evidence  of  the  fact  in
their  traditions.  This  condition  may  be  due  in  part  to  the  temper  of
the  Cherokee  mind,  which,  as  has  been  already  stated,  is  accustomed
to  look  forward  to  new  things  rather  than  to  dwell  upon  the  past.
The  lirst  Cherokee  war,  with  its  stories  of  Agansta'ta  and  Ata-gul'kalii',
is  absolutely  forgotten.  Of  the  long  Revolutionary  struggle  they
have  hardly  a  recollection,  although  they  were  constantly  fighting
throughout  the  whole  period  and  for  several  years  after,  and  at  one
time  were  brought  to  the  verge  of  ruin  by  four  concerted  expeditious,
which  ravaged  their  country  simultaneously  from  different  directions
and  destroyed  almost  every  one  of  their  towns.  Even  the  Creek  war,
in  which  many  of  their  warriors  took  a  prominent  part,  was  already
nearly  forgotten  some  years  ago.  Beyond  a  few  stories  of  encounters
with  the  Shawano  and  Iroquois  there  is  hardly  anything  that  can  be
called  history  until  well  within  the  present  century.
With  some  tribes  the  winter  season  and  the  night  are  the  time  for
telling  stories,  but  to  the  Cherokee  all  times  are  alike.  As  our  grand-
mothers begin,  "'Once  upon  a  time,"  so  the  Cherokee  story-teller
introduces  Ins  narrative  by  saying:  "This  is  what  the  old  men  told
me  when  I  was  a  boy." Not  all  tell  the  same  stories,  for  in  tribal  lore,  as  in  all  other  sorts
of  knowledge,  we  find  specialists.  Some  common  minds  take  note
only  of  common  things  —  little  stories  of  the  rabbit,  the  terrapin,  and
the  others,  told  to  point  a  joke  or  amuse  a  child.  Others  dwell  upon
the  wonderful  and  supernatural  —  Tsul'kalu',  Tsuwe'nahi,  and  the
Thunderers  —  and  those  sacred  things  to  be  told  only  with  prayer
and  purification.  Then,  again,  there  are  still  a  few  old  warriors  who
live  in  the  memory  of  heroic  days  when  there  were  wars  with  the
Seneca  and  the  Shawano,  and  these  men  are  the  historians  of  the
tribe  and  the  conservators  of  its  antiquities.
The  question  of  the  origin  of  myths  is  one  which  affords  abundant
opportunity  for  ingenious  theories  in  the  absence  of  any  possibility
of  proof.  Those  of  the  Cherokee  are  too  far  broken  down  ever  to  be
woven  together  again  into  any  long-connected  origin  legend,  such  as
we  tind  with  some  tribes,  although  a  few  still  exhibit  a  certain  sequence
wrhich  indicates  that  they  once  formed  component  parts  of  a  cycle.
From  the  prominence  of  the  rabbit  in  the  animal  stories,  as  well  as  in
those  found  among  the  southern  negroes,  an  effort  has  been  made  to
establish  for  them  a  negro  origin,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the  rab-
bit— the  Great  White  Rabbit — is  the  hero-god,  trickster,  and  wonder-
worker of  all  the  tribes  east  of  the  Mississippi  from  Hudson  bay  to
the  Gulf.  In  European  folklore  also  the  rabbit  is  regarded  as  some-
thing uncanny  and  half-supernatural,  and  even  in  far-off  Korea  he  is
the  central  figure  in  the  animal  myths.  Just  why  this  should  be  so
is  a  question  that  inay  be  left  to  the  theorist  to  decide.     Among  the


mooney]  CONTACT    WITH    NEGROES  233
Algonquian  tribes  the  name,  wabos,  seems  to  have  been  confounded
with  that  of  the  dawn,  waban,  so  that  the  Great  White  Rabbit  is
really  the  incarnation  of  the  eastern  dawn  that  brings  light  and  life  and
driven  away  the  dark  shadows  which  have  held  the  world  in  chains.
The  animal  itself  seems  to  he  regarded  by  the  Indians  as  the  fitting
type  of  defenseless  weakness  protected  and  made  safe  by  constantly
alert  vigilance,  and  with  a  disposition,  moreover,  for  turning  up  at
unexpected  moments.  The  same  characteristics  would  appeal  as
strongly  to  the  primitive  mind  of  the  negro.  The  very  expression
which  Harris  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Uncle  Remus,  '"In  dem  days
Brer  Rabbit  en  his  fambly  wuz  at  the  head  er  de  gang  w'en  enny
racket  wus  en  hand,"1  was  paraphrased  in  the  Cherokee  language  by
Suyeta  in  introducing  his  first  rabbit  story:  "  Tsi'stu  wuliga 'ndtHtUn'
ii,,,',iuts,itiY  tj, x.'i—  the  Rabbit  was  the  leader  of  them  all  in  mischief."
The  expression  struck  the  author  so  forcibly  that  the  words  wire
recorded  as  spoken.
In  regard  to  the  contact  between  the  two  races,  by  which  such  stories
could  be  borrowed  from  one  by  the  other,  it  is  not  commonly  known
that  in  all  the  southern  colonies  Indian  slaves  were  bought  and  sold  and
kept  in  servitude  and  worked  in  the  fields  side  by  side  with  negroes  up
to  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  Not  to  go  back  to  the  Spanish  period.
when  such  things  were  the  order  of  the  day,  we  find  the  Cherokee  as
early  as  Kin:]  complaining  that  their  people  were  being  kidnaped  by
slave  hunters.  Hundreds  of  captured  Tuscarora  and  nearly  the  whole
tribe  of  the  Appalachee  were  distributed  as  slaves  among  the  Carolina
colonists  in  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  while  the  Natchez
and  others  shared  a  similar  fate  in  Louisiana,  and  as  late  at  least  as
1776  Cherokee  prisoners  of  war  were  still  sold  to  the  highest  bidder
for  the  same  purpose.  Atone  time  it  was  charged  against  the  gov-
ernor of  South  Carolina  that  he  was  provoking  a  general  Indian  war
by  his  encouragement  of  slave  hunts.  Furthermore,  as  the  coast  tribes
dwindled  they  were  compelled  to  associate  and  intermarry  with  the
negroes  until  they  finally  lost  their  identity  ami  were  classed  with
that  race,  so  that  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  blood  of  the  south-
ern negroes  is  unquestionably  Indian.
The  negro,  with  his  genius  for  imitation  and  his  love  for  stories.
especially  of  the  comic  variety,  must  undoubtedly  have  absorbed  much
from  tlie  Indian  in  this  way.  while  on  the  other  hand  the  Indian,  with
his  pride  of  conservatism  and  his  contempt  for  a  subject  race,  would
have  taken  but  little  from  the  negro,  and  that  little  could  not  easily
have  found  its  way  back  to  the  free  tribes.  Some  of  these  animal
stories  are  common  to  widely  separated  tribes  among  whom  there
can  be  no  suspicion  of  negro  influences.  Thus  the  famous  "tar  baby"
story  has   variants,    not   only   among  the   Cherokee,  but  also   in    New
1  Harris,  J.  C,  Uncle  Rei  .  p.  29;  New  Y<>rk,  1886.


234  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.axn.19
Mexico.  Washington,  and  southern  Alaska  —  wherever,  in  fact,  the
pifion  or  the  pine  supplies  enough  gum  to  be  molded  into  a  ball  for
Indian  uses  —  while  the  incident  of  the  Rabbit  dining'  the  Bear  is  found
with  nearly  every  tribe  from  Nova  Scotia  to  the  Pacific.  The  idea  that
such  stories  are  necessarily  of  negro  origin  is  due  largely  to  the  com-
mon but  mistaken  notion  that  the  Indian  has  no  sense  of  humor.
In  many  cases  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  borrowing  from  either
side,  the  myths  being  such  as  would  naturally  spring  up  in  any  part  of
the  world  among  primitive  people  accustomed  to  observe  the  charac-
teristics of  animals,  which  their  religious  system  regarded  as  differing
in  no  essential  from  human  kind,  save  only  in  outward  form.  Thus
in  Europe  and  America  the  terrapin  has  been  accepted  as  the  type  of
plodding  slowness,  while  the  rabbit,  with  his  sudden  dash,  or  the  deer
with  his  bounding  stride,  is  the  type  of  speed.  What  more  natural
than  that  the  story-teller  should  set  one  to  race  against  the  other,  with
the  victory  in  favor  of  the  patient  striver  against  the  self-confident
boaster?  The  idea  of  a  hungry  wolf  or  other  beast  of  prey  luring
his  victims  by  the  promise  of  a  new  song  or  dance,  during  which  they
must  close  their  eyes,  is  also  one  that  would  easily  occur  among  any
primitive  people  whose  chief  pastime  is  dancing.1
On  the  other  hand,  such  a  conception  as  that  of  Flint  and  the  Rabbit
could  only  be  the  outgrowth  of  a  special  cosmogonic  theology,  though
now  indeed  broken  and  degraded,  and  it  is  probable  that  many  myths
told  now  only  for  amusement  are  really  worn  down  fragments  of
ancient  sacred  traditions.  Thus  the  story  just  noted  appears  in  a  dif-
ferent dress  among  the  Iroquois  as  a  part  of  their  great  creation  myth.
The  Cherokee  being  a  detached  tribe  of  the  Iroquois,  we  may  expect  to
find  among  the  latter,  if  it  he  not  already  too  late,  the  explanation  and
more  perfect  statement  of  some  things  which  are  obscure  in  the  Cher-
okee myths.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  Indian,  like
other  men,  does  some  things  for  simple  amusement,  and  it  is  useless
to  look  for  occult  meanings  where  none  exist.
Except  as  to  the  local  traditions  and  a  few  others  which  are  obviously
the  direct  outgrowth  of  Cherokee  conditions,  it  is  impossible  to  fix  a
definite  starting  point  for  the  myths.  It  would  be  unwise  to  assert
that  even  the  majority  of  them  originated  within  the  tribe.  The
Cherokee  have  strains  of  Creek,  Catawba,  Uchee,  Natchez,  Iroquois,
Osage,  and  Shawano  blood,  and  such  admixture  implies  contact  more
or  less  intimate  and  continued.     Indians  are  great  wanderers,  and  a
1  Fur  ;i  presentation  -if  the  African  and  European  argument  see  Harris,  Nights  with  Uncle  Remus.
introduction,  1883;  and  Uncle  Remus.  His  Songs  and  His  Sayings,  introduction,  1886;  Gerber,
Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  in  Journal  of  American  Folklore,  vi,  p.  23,  October,  1893.  In
regard  to  tribal  dissemination  of  myths  see  Boas,  Dissemination  of  Tales  among  the  Natives  of  North
America,  in  Journal  of  American  Folklore,  IV,  p.  12,  January,  1891;  TheGrowthof  Indian  Mythologies,
in  the  same  journal,  IX,  p.  32,  January  ls>.ni;  Northern  Elements  in  the  Mythology  of  the  Navaho,  in
American  Anthropologist,  x.  p.  11.  November,  ls'JT;  introduction  to  Teit's  Traditions  of  the  Thompson
River  Indians.  1898.  IT  Boas  has  probably  devoted  more  study  to  the  subject  than  any  other  anthro-
pologist, and  his  personal  observations  include  tribes  from  the  Arctic  regions  to  the  Columbia.


hooney]  OBIGIH    OF    THE    MYTHS  235
myth  can  travel  as  far  as  a  redstone  pipe  or  a  string  of  wampum.  It
was  customary,  as  it  still  is  i<>  a  limited  extent  in  the  West,  for  large
parties,  sometimes  even  a  whole  band  or  village,  to  make  lime-  visits
to  other  tribes,  dancing,  feasting,  trading,  and  exchanging  stories  w  itli
their  friends  for  weeks  or  months  at  a  time,  with  the  expectation  that
their  hosts  would  return  the  visit  within  the  next  summer.  Regular
trade  routes  crossed  the  continent  from  east  to  west  and  from  north  to
south,  and  when  the  subject  has  been  fully  investigated  it  will  lie  found
that  this  intertribal  commerce  was  as  constant  and  well  recognized  a
part  of  Indian  life  as  is  our  own  railroad  traffic  today.  The  very
existence  of  a  trade  jargon  or  a  sign  language  is  proof  of  intertribal
relations  over  wide  areas.  Their  political  alliances  also  were  often
far-reaching,  for  Pontiac  welded  into  a  warlike  confederacy  all  the
trilies  from  the  Atlantic  border  to  the  head  of  the  Mississippi,  while
the  emissaries  of  the  Shawano  prophet  carried  the  story  of  his  rev-
elations throughout  the  whole  region  from  the  Florida  coast  to  the
Saskatchewan.
In  view  of  these  facts  it  is  as  useless  to  attempt  to  trace  the  origin
of  every  myth  as  to  claim  a  Cherokee  authorship  for  them  all.  From
\\  hat  we  know  of  the  character  of  the  Shawano,  their  tendency  toward
the  ceremonial  and  the  mystic,  and  their  close  relations  with  the
Cherokee,  it  may  he  inferred  that  some  of  the  myths  originated  with
that  tribe.  We  should  naturally  expect  also  to  find  close  correspond-
ence with  the  myths  of  the  Creeks  and  other  southern  tribes  within
the  former  area  of  the  Mobilian  trade  language.  The  localization  at
home  of  all  the  more  important  myths  indicates  a  long  residence  in
the  country.  As  the  majority  of  those  here  given  belong  to  the  half
dozen  counties  still  familiar  to  the  East  Cherokee,  we  may  guess  how
many  attached  to  the  afieient  territory  of  the  tribe  arc  now  irrecov-
erably lost.
Contact  with  the  white  race  seems  to  have  produced  very  little
impression  on  the  tribal  mythology,  and  not  more  than  three  or  four
stories  current  among  the  Cherokee  can  he  assigned  to  a  Caucasian
source.  These  have  not  been  reproduced  here,  for  the  reason  that
they  are  plainly  European,  and  the  author  has  chosen  not  to  follow  the
example  of  some  collectors  who  have  assumed  that  every  tale  told  in  an
Indina  language  is  necessarily  an  Indian  story.  Scores  recorded  in  col-
lections from  the  North  and  West  are  nothing  more  than  variants  from
the  celebrated  Hausmarchen,  as  told  by  French  trappers  and  voyageurs
to  their  Indian  campmates  and  halfbreed  children.  It  might  perhaps
be  thought  that  missionary  influence  would  be  evident  in  the  genesis
tradition,  but  such  is  not  the  case.  The  Bible  story  kills  the  Indian
tradition,  and  there  is  no  amalgamation.  It  is  hardly  necessary  tosay
that  stories  of  a  great  fish  which  swallows  a  man  and  of  a  great  Hood


236  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
which  destroys  a  people  are  found  the  world  over.  The  supposed
Cherokee  hero-god,  Wiisi,  described  by  one  writer  as  so  remarkably
resembling  the  great  Hebrew  lawgiver  is  in  fact  that  great  teacher
himself,  Wasi  being  the  Cherokee  approximate  for  Moses,  and  the
good  missionary  who  first  recorded  the  story  was  simply  listening  to
a  chapter  taken  by  his  convert  from  the  Cherokee  testament.  The
whole  primitive  pantheon  of  the  Cherokee  is  still  preserved  in  their
sacred  formulas.
As  compared  with  those  from  some  other  tribes  the  Cherokee  myths
are  clean.  For  picturesque  imagination  and  wealth  of  detail  they
rank  high,  and  some  of  the  wonder  Stories  may  challenge  those  of
Europe  and  India.  The  numerous  parallels  furnished  will  serve  to
indicate  their  relation  to  the  general  Indian  system.  Unless  otherwise
noted,  every  myth  here  given  has  been  obtained  directly  from  the
Indians,  and  in  nearly  every  case  has  been  verified  from  several
sources.
"I  know  not  how  the  truth  may  be,
I  tell  the  tale  as  'twas  told  to  me."
First  and  chief  in  the  list  of  story  tellers  comes  A'yun'ini,  "Swim-
mer," from  whom  nearly  three-fourths  of  the  whole  number  were
originally  obtained,  together  with  nearly  as  large  a  proportion  of  the
whole  body  of  Cherokee  material  now  in  possession  of  the  author.
The  collection  could  not  have  been  made  without  his  help,  and  now
that  he  is  gone  it  can  never  be  duplicated.  Born  about  1835,  shortly
before  the  Removal,  he  grew  up  under  the  instruction  of  masters  to  be
a  priest,  doctor,  and  keeper  of  tradition,  so  that  he  was  recognized  as
an  authority  throughout  the  band  and  by  such  a  competent  outside
judge  as  Colonel  Thomas.  He  served  through  the  war  as  second
sergeant  of  the  Cherokee  Company  A,  Sixty-ninth  North  Carolina
Confederate  Infantry.  Thomas  Legion.  He  was  prominent  in  the
local  affairs  of  the  band,  and  no  Green-corn  dance,  ballplay,  or  other
tribal  function  was  ever  considered  complete  without  his  presence  and
active  assistance.  A  genuine  aboriginal  antiquarian  and  patriot,
proud  of  his  people  and  their  ancient  system,  he  took  delight  in
recording  in  his  native  alphabet  the  songs  and  sacred  formulas  of
priests  and  dancers  and  the  names  of  medicinal  plants  and  the  pre-
scriptions with  which  they  were  compounded,  while  his  mind  was  a
storehouse  of  Indian  tradition.  To  a  happy  descriptive  style  he  added
a  musical  voice  for  the  songs  and  a  peculiar  faculty  for  imitating
the  characteristic  cry  of  bird  or  beast,  so  that  to  listen  to  one  of  his
recitals  was  often  a  pleasure  in  itself,  even  to  one  who  understood  not  a
word  of  the  language.  He  spoke  no  English,  and  to  the  day  of  his  death
clung  to  the  moccasin  and  turban,  together  with  the  rattle,  his  badge
of  authority.     He  died  in  March,  1S99,  aged  about  sixty-five,  and  was


moomvj  STORY-TELLERS  237
buried  like  a  true  Cherokee  on  the  slope  of  a  forest-clad  mountain.
Peace  to  his  ashes  and  sorrow  for  his  going,  for  with  him  perished  half
the  tradition  of  a  people.
Next  in  order  comes  the  name  <>f  Itagu'nahi.  better  known  a^  John
A\.  born  about  L800  and  now  consequently  just  touching  the  centurj
mark,  being  the  oldest  man  of  the  band.  He  has  a  distinct  recollec-
tion of  tin'  Creek  war,  at  which  time  he  was  about  twelve  years  of  age,
and  was  already  married  and  a  father  when  the  lands  east  of  Xantahala
were  sold  by  the  treaty  of  L819.  Although  not  a  professional  priest
or  doctor,  he  was  recognized,  before  age  had  dulled  his  faculties,  as
an  authority  upon  all  relating  to  tribal  custom,  and  was  an  expert  in
the  making  of  rattles,  wands,  and  other  ceremonial  paraphernalia.  ( >f
a  poetic  and  imaginative  temperament,  he  cared  most  for  the  wonder
stories,  of  the  giant  Tsul'kalu',  of  the  great  Uktena  or  of  the  invisible
spirit  people,  but  he  had  also  a  keen  appreciation  of  the  humorous
animal  stories.  He  speaks  no  English,  and  with  his  erect  spare  figure
and  piercing  eye  is  a  tine  specimen  of  the  old-time  Indian.  Notwith-
standing his  great  age  he  walked  without  other  assistance  than  his
stick  to  the  last  ball  game,  where  he  watched  every  run  with  the  closest
interest,  and  would  have  attended  the  dance  the  night  before  but  for
the  interposition  of  friends.
Suyeta,  "The  Chosen  One,"  who  preaches  regularly  as  a  Baptist
minister  to  an  Indian  congregation,  does  not  deal  much  with  the  Indian
supernatural,  perhaps  through  deference  to  his  clerical  obligations.
but  has  a  good  memory  and  liking  for  rabbit  stories  and  others  of  the
same  class.  He  served  in  the  Confederate  army  during  the  war  as
fourth  sergeant  in  Company  A,  of  the  Sixty-ninth  North  Carolina.
and  is  now  a  well-preserved  man  of  about  sixty-two.  He  speaks  no
English,  but  by  an  ingenious  system  of  his  own  has  learned  to  use  a
concordance  for  verifying  references  in  his  Cherokee  bible.  He  is
also  a  first-class  carpenter  and  mason.
Another  principal  informant  was  Ta'gwadihf,  "Catawba-killer,"  of
Cheowa,  who  died  a  few  years  ago,  aged  about  seventy.  He  was  a
doctor  and  made  no  claim  to  special  knowledge  of  myths  or  ceremonials.
but  was  aide  to  furnish  several  valuable  stories,  besides  confirmatorj
evidence  for  a  large  number  obtained  from  other  sources.
Besides  these  may  be  named,  among  the  East  Cherokee,  the  late
Chief  N.  J.  Smith;  Sal&'ll, mentioned  elsewhere,  who  died  about  L895;
Tsesa'ni  or  Jessan,  who  also  served  in  the  war:  Aya'sta.  one  of  the
principal  conservatives  among  the  women;  and  James  and  David
Blythe,  younger  men  of  mixed  blood,  with  an  English  education,  but
inheritors  of  a  large  share  of  Indian  lore  from  their  father,  who  was
a  recognized  leader  of  ceremony.
Among  informants  in  the  western  Cherokee  Nation  the  principal  was
James   D.  Watford,   known  to  the    Indians   a-   Tsuskwanun'nawa'ta,


238  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
"Worn-out-blanket,"  a  mixed-blood  speaking-  and  writing  both  lan-
guages, born  in  the  old  Cherokee  Nation  near  the  site  of  the  pres-
ent Clarkesville,  Georgia,  in  1806.  and  dying-  when  about  ninety
years  of  age  at  his  home  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,
adjoining  the  Seneca  reservation.  The  name  figures  prominently  in
the  early  history  of  North  Carolina  and  Georgia.  His  grandfather,
Colonel  Wafford,  was  an  officer  in  the  American  Revolutionary  army,
and  shortly  after  the  treaty  of  Hopewell,  in  17S5,  established  a  colony
known  as  "  Watford's  settlement,"  in  npper  Georgia,  on  territory  which was  afterward  found  to  be  within  the  Indian  boundary  and  was  acquired
by  special  treaty  purchase  in  1801.  His  name  is  appended,  as  witness
for  the  state  of  Georgia,  to  the  treaty  of  Holston,  in  1794. '  On  his
mother's  side  Mr  Wafford  was  of  mixed  Cherokee,  Natchez,  and  white
blood,  she  being  a  cousin  of  Sequoya.  He  was  also  remotely  con-
nected with  Cornelius  Dougherty,  the  first  trader  established  among
the  Cherokee.  In  the  course  of  his  long  life  he  tilled  many  positions
of  trust  and  honor  among  his  people.  In  his  youth  he  attended
the  mission  school  at  Valleytown  under  Reverend  Evan  Jones,  and
just  before  the  adoption  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet  he  finished  the
translation  into  phonetic  Cherokee  spelling  of  a  Sunday  school  speller
noted  in  Pilling' s  Iroquoin  Bibliography.  In  1821  he  was  the  census
enumerator  for  that  district  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  embracing  upper
Hiwassee  river,  in  North  Carolina,  with  Nottely  and  Toccoa  in  the
adjoining  portion  of  Georgia.  His  fund  of  Cherokee  geographic
information  thus  acquired  was  found  to  be  invaluable.  He  was  one  of
the  two  commanders  of  the  largest  detachment  of  emigrants  at  the
time  of  the  removal,  and  his  name  appears  as  a  councilor  for  the  western
Nation  in  the  Cherokee  Almanac  for  1846.  When  employed  by  the
author  at  Tahlequah  in  1891  his  mind  was  still  clear  and  his  memory
keen.  Being  of  practical  bent,  he  was  concerned  chiefly  with  tribal
history,  geography,  linguistics,  and  every-day  life  and  custom,  on  all
of  which  subjects  his  knowledge  was  exact  and  detailed,  but  there  were
few  myths  for  which  he  was  not  able  to  furnish  confirmatory  testi-
mony. Despite  his  education  he  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  Niinne'hi,
and  several  of  the  best  legends  connected  with  them  were  obtained
from  him.  His  death  takes  from  the  Cherokee  one  of  the  last  connect-
ing links  between  the  present  and  the  past.
1See  contemporary  notice  in  the  Historical  Sketch.


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOG NINETEENTH   ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    XII
JOHN     AX     ilTAGU'NUHh




IV— THE  MYTHS
(  Josmogonic  Myths
i.   HOW   THE   WORLD   WAS   MADE
The  earth  is  a  great  island  floating  in  a  sea  of  water,  and  suspended
at  each  of  the  four  cardinal  points  by  a  cord  hanging  down  from
the  sky  vault,  which  is  of  solid  rock.  When  the  world  grows  old  and
worn  out.  the  people  will  die  and  the  cords  will  break  and  let  the  earth
sink  down  into  the  ocean,  and  all  will  he  water  again.  The  Indians
are  afraid  of  this.
When  all  was  water,  the  animals  were  above  in  Galun'latI,  beyond
the  arch;  but  it  was  very  much  crowded,  and  they  were  wanting  more
room.  They  wondered  what  was  below  the  water,  and  at  last  Dayu-
ni'si,  "Beaver's  Grandchild,"  the  little  Water-beetle,  offered  to  go  and
see  if  it  could  learn.  It  darted  in  every  direction  over  the  surface  of
the  water,  hut  could  find  no  firm  place  to  rest.  Then  it  dived  to  the
bottom  and  came  up  with  some  soft  mud.  which  began  to  grow  and
spread  on  every  side  until  it  became  the  island  which  we  call  the
earth.  It  was  afterward  fastened  to  the  sky  with  four  cords,  but  no
one  remembers  who  did  this.
At  first  the  earth  was  Hat  and  very  soft  and  wet.  The  animals  were
anxious  to  get  down,  and  sent  out  different  birds  to  see  if  it  was  yet
dry,  but  they  found  no  place  to  alight  and  came  back  again  to  Galun'- lati. At  last  it  seemed  to  be  time,  and  they  sent  out  the  Buzzard  and
told  him  to  go  and  make  ready  for  them.  This  was  the  Great  Buz-
zard, the  father  of  all  the  buzzards  we  see  now.  He  flew  all  over  the
earth,  low  down  near  the  ground,  and  it  was  still  soft.  When  he
reached  the  Cherokee  country,  he  was  very  tired,  and  his  wings  began
to  flap  and  strike  the  ground,  and  wherever  they  struck  the  earth
there  was  a  valley,  and  where  they  turned  up  again  then'  was  a
mountain.  When  the  animals  above  saw  this,  they  were  afraid  that
the  whole  world  would  he  mountains,  so  they  called  him  back,  bul  I  lie
Cherokee  country  remains  full  of  mountains  to  this  day.
When  the  earth  was  dry  and  the  animals  came  down,  it  was  still
dark,  so  they  got  the  sun  and  set  it  in  a  track  to  go  every  day  across
the  island  from  east  to  west,  just  overhead.  It  was  too  hot  this  way,
and  T.siska'gili'.  the  Red  Crawfish,  had  his  shell  scorched  a  bright  red,
so  that  his  meat  was  spoiled;  ami  the  Cherokee  do  not  eat  it.     The


240  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
conjurers  put  the  sun  another  hand-breadth  higher  in  the  air,  but  it  was
still  too  hot.  They  raised  it  another  time,  and  another,  until  it  was
seven  handbreadths  high  and  just  under  the  sky  arch.  Then  it  was
right,  and  they  left  it  so.  This  is  why  the  conjurers  call  the  highest
place  (julkwa'gine  Di'galuiYlatiyiifi',  "the  seventh  height,"  because  it  is
seven  hand-breadths  above  the  earth.  Every  day  the  sun  goes  along
under  this  arch,  and  returns  at  night  on  the  upper  side  to  the  starting
place. There  is  another  world  under  this,  and  it  is  like  ours  in  every-
thing— animals,  plants,  and  people — save  that  the  seasons  are  different.
The  streams  that  come  down  from  the  mountains  are  the  trails  by
which  we  reach  this  underworld,  and  the  springs  at  their  heads  are
the  doorways  by  which  we  enter  it,  but  to  do  this  one  must  fast  and
go  to  water  and  have  one  of  the  underground  people  for  a  guide.  We
know  that  the  seasons  in  the  underworld  are  different  from  ours,
because  the  water  in  the  springs  is  always  warmer  in  winter  and
cooler  in  summer  than  the  outer  air.
When  the  animals  and  plants  were  first  made — we  do  not  know  by
whom — they  were  told  to  watch  and  keep  awake  for  seven  nights,
just  as  young  men  now  fast  and  keep  awake  when  they  pray  to  their
medicine.  They  tried  to  do  this,  and  nearly  all  were  awake  through
the  first  night,  but  the  next  night  several  dropped  off  to  sleep,  and  the
third  night  others  were  asleep,  and  then  others,  until,  on  the  seventh
night,  of  all  the  animals  only  the  owl,  the  panther,  and  one  or  two
more  were  still  awake.  To  these  were  given  the  power  to  see  and  to
go  about  in  the  dark,  and  to  make  prey  of  the  birds  and  animals  which
must  sleep  at  night.  Of  the  trees  only  the  cedar,  the  pine,  the  spruce,
the  holly,  and  the  laurel  were  awake  to  the  end,  and  to  them  it  was
given  to  be  always  green  and  to  be  greatest  for  medicine,  but  to  the
others  it  was  said:  "Because  you  have  not  endured  to  the  end  you
shall  lose  your  hair  every  winter.1' Men  came  after  the  animals  and  plants.     At  first  there  were  only  a  \
brother  and  sister  until  he  struck  her  with  a  fish  and  told  her  to  mul-     \
tiply,  and  so  it  was.     In  seven   days  a  child  was  born  to   her,  and
thereafter  every  seven  days  another,  and  they  increased  very  fast  until     J
there  was  danger  that  the  world  could  not  keep  them.     Then  it  was
made  that  a  woman  should  have  only  one  child  in  a  year,  and  it  has
been  so  ever  since.
2.   THE   FIRST  FIRE
In  the  beginning  there  was  no  fire,  and  the  world  was  cold,  until  the
Thunders  (Ani'-Hyun'tikwala'ski),  who  lived  up  in  Galun'lati.  sent  their
lightning  and  put  fire  into  the  bottom  of  a  hollow  sycamore  tree  which
grew  on  an  island.  The  animals  knew  it  was  there,  because  they  could
see  the  smoke  coming  out  at  the  top,  but  they  could  not  get  to  it  on


i   my;  THE    FIRST    BTRE  241
account  of  the  water,  so  they  held  a  council  to  decide  what  to  do.  This
was  a  long  time  ago.
Every  animal  thai  could  fly  or  swim  was  anxious  to  go  after  the  tiiv.
The  Raven  offered,  and  because  he  was  so  large  and  strong  they  thought
he  could  surely  do  the  work,  so  he  was  sent  first.  He  flew  high  and
Ear  across  the  water  and  alighted  on  the  sycamore  tree,  but  while  he
was  wondering  what  to  do  next,  the  heat  had  scorched  all  his  feathers
black,  and  he  was  frightened  and  came  back  without  the  fire.  Tin'
little  Screech-owl  (  Wa'huhu')  volunteered  to  go,  and  reached  the  place
safely,  lint  while  he  was  looking  down  into  the  hollow  tree  a  blast  of
hot  air  came  up  and  Dearly  burned  out  his  eyes.  He  managed  to  fly
home  as  best  he  could,  but  it  was  a  long  time  before  he  could  see  well,
and  his  eyes  are  red  to  this  day.  Then  the  HootingOwl  (  WgvJcu')  and
the  Horned  Owl  (TskiW)  went,  but  by  the  time  they  got  to  the  hollow
tree  the  tire  was  burning  so  fiercely  that  the  smoke  nearly  blinded
them,  and  the  ashes  carried  up  by  the  wind  made  white  rings  about
their  eyes.  They  had  to  come  home  again  without  the  fire,  but  with
all  their  rubbing  they  were  never  able  to  get  rid  of  the  white  rings.
Now  no  more  of  the  birds  would  venture,  and  so  the  little  Uksu'hi
snake,  the  black  racer,  said  he  would  go  through  the  water  and  bring
back  some  tire.  He  swam  across  to  the  island  and  crawled  through
the  grass  to  the  tree,  and  went  in  by  a  small  hole  at  the  bottom.  The
heat  and  smoke  were  too  much  for  him,  too,  and  after  dodging  about
blindly  over  the  hot  ashes  until  hi'  was  almost  on  tire  himself  he  man-
aged by  good  luck  to  get  out  again  at  the  same  hole,  but  his  body  had
been  scorched  black,  and  he  has  ever  since  had  the  habit  of  darting
and  doubling  on  his  track  as  if  trying  to  escape  from  close  quarters.
He  came  back,  and  the  great  blacksnake,  Gule'gi,  "The  Climber." offered  to  go  for  tire.  He  swam  over  to  the  island  and  climbed  up  the
tree  on  the  outside,  as  the  blacksnake  always  does,  but  when  he  put
his  head  down  into  the  hole  the  smoke  choked  him  so  that  he  fell  into
the  burning  stump,  and  before  he  could  climb  out  again  he  was  as
black  as  the  Uksu'hi.
Now  they  held  another  council,  for  still  there  was  no  tire,  and  the
world  was  cold,  but  birds,  snakes,  and  four-footed  animals,  all  had
some  excuse  for  not  going,  because  they  were  all  afraid  to  venture
near  the  burning  sycamore,  until  at  last  Kanane'skI  Amai'vehi  (the
Water  Spider)  said  she  would  go.  This  is  not  the  water  spider  that
looks  like  a  mosquito,  but  the  other  one.  with  black  downy  hair  and
red  stripes  on  her  body.  She  can  run  on  top  of  the  water  or  dive  to
the  bottom,  so  there  would  be  no  trouble  to  get  over  to  the  island,  but
the  question  was.  How  could  she  bring  back  the  tire;  "•I'll  manage
that," said  the  Water  Spider;  so  she  spun  a  thread  from  her  bodj  and
wove  it  into  a  tusti  bowl,  which  she  fastened  on  her  back.  Then  she
crossed  over  to  the  island  and  through  the  grass  to  where  the  tire  was
19  eth— 01   1C


242  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
still  burning.  She  put  one  little  coal  of  fire  into  her  bowl,  and  came
back  with  it,  and  ever  since  we  have  had  fire,  and  the  Water  Spider  still
keeps  her  tusti  bowl.
3.   KANA'TI  AND   SELU:   THE   ORIGIN   OF   GAME  AND   CORN
When  I  was  a  boy  this  is  what  the  old  men  told  me  they  had  heard
when  they  were  boys.
Long  years  ago,  soon  after  the  world  was  made,  a  hunter  and  his
wife  lived  at  Pilot  knob  with  their  only  child,  a  little  boy.  The
father's  name  was  Kana'ti  (The  Lucky  Hunter),  and  his  wife  was
called  Selu  (Corn).  No  matter  when  Kana'ti  went  into  the  wood,  he
never  failed  to  bring  back  a  load  of  game,  which  his  wife  would  cut
up  and  prepare,  washing  off  the  blood  from  the  meat  in  the  river  near
the  house.  The  little  boy  used  to  play  down  by  the  river  every  day.
and  one  morning  the  old  people  thought  the}7  heard  laughing  and  talk-
ing in  the  bushes  as  though  there  were  two  children  there.  When  the
boy  came  home  at  night  his  parents  asked  him  who  had  been  playing
with  him  all  day.  "He  comes  out  of  the  water,"  said  the  boy.  "and
be  calls  himself  my  elder  brother.  He  says  his  mother  was  cruel  to
him  and  threw  him  into  the  river."  Then  the}7  knew  that  the  strange
boy  had  sprung  from  the  blood  of  the  game  which  Selu  had  washed
off  at  the  river's  edge.
Every  day  when  the  little  boy  went  out  to  play  the  other  would  join
him.  but  as  he  always  went  back  again  into  the  water  the  old  people
never  had  a  chance  to  see  him.  At  last  one  evening  Kana'ti  said  to  his
son,  "Tomorrow,  when  the  other  boy  comes  to  play,  get  him  to  wrestle
with  you,  and  when  you  have  your  arms  around  him  hold  on  to  him
and  call  for  us."  The  boy  promised  to  do  as  he  was  told,  so  the  next
day  as  soon  as  his  playmate  appeared  he  challenged  him  to  a  wrestling
match.  The  other  agreed  at  once,  but  as  soon  as  they  had  their  arms
around  each  other,  Kana'ti's  boy  began  to  scream  for  his  father.  The
old  folks  at  once  came  running  down,  and  as  soon  as  the  Wild  Boy  saw
them  he  struggled  to  free  himself  and  cried  out,  "Let  me  go;  you
threw  me  away!"  but  his  brother  held  on  until  the  parents  leached  the
spot,  when  they  seized  the  Wild  Boy  and  took  him  home  with  them.
They  kept  him  in  the  house  until  they  had  tamed  him,  but  he  was
always  wild  and  artful  in  his  disposition,  and  was  the  leader  of  his
brother  in  every  mischief.  It  was  not  long  until  the  old  people  dis-
covered that  he  had  magic  powers,  and  they  called  him  I'nage-utasun'ln
(He-who-grew-up-wild).
Whenever  Kana'ti  went  into  the  mountains  he  always  brought  back
a  fat  buck  or  doe,  or  maybe  a  couple  of  turkeys.  One  day  the  Wild
Boy  said  to  his  brother,  ''I  wonder  where  our  father  gets  all  that
game;  let's  follow  him  next  time  and  find  out."  A  few  days  afterward
Kana'ti  took  a  bow  and  some  feathers  in  his   hand  and  started  off


UOONEY]  KANATI     AMI    SKI.T  243
toward  the  west.  The  boys  waited  a  little  while  and  then  went  afti  r
him,  keeping  out  <d'  sight  until  they  saw  him  go  into  a  swamp  where there  were  a  great  many  of  the  small  reeds  that  hunters  use  to  make
arrowshafts.  Then  the  Wild  Boy  changed  bimself  into  a  puff  of
l>ird's  down,  w  hich  the  wind  took  up  and  carried  until  it  alighted  upon
Kana'ti's  shoulder  just  as  he  entered  the  swamp,  but  Kana'ti  knew
nothing  about  it.  Theold  man  «ut  reeds,  fitted  the  feathers  to  them  and
made  some  arrows,  and  the  Wild  Boy-  in  his  other  shape  thought,
••I  wonder  what  those  things  are  for?"  When  Kana'ti  had  his  arrows
finished  he  came  out  of  the  swamp  and  went  on  again.  The  wind  blew
the  down  from  his  shoulder,  and  it  fell  in  the  woods,  when  the  Wild
Boy  took  his  right  shape  again  and  went  back  and  told  his  brother
what  he  had  seen.  Keeping  Out  of  sight  of  their  father,  they  followed
him  up  the  mountain  until  he  stopped  at  a  certain  place  and  lifted  a
large  rock.  At  once  there  ran  out  a  buck,  which  Kana'ti  shot,  and
then  lifting  it  upon  his  back  he  started  for  home  again.  "Oho!"
exclaimed  the  boys,  "he  keeps  all  the  deer  shut  up  in  that  hole,  and
whenever  he  wants  meat  he  just  Lets  one  out  and  kills  it  with  those
things  he  made  in  the  swamp."  They  hurried  and  reached  home  before
their  father,  who  had  the  heavy  deer  to  carry,  and  he  never  knew  that
they  had  followed.
A  few  days  later  the  hoys  went  back  to  the  swamp,  (ait  some  reeds,
and  made  seven  arrows,  and  then  started  up  the  mountain  to  where
their  father  kept  the  game.  When  they  got  to  the  place,  they  raised
the  rock  and  a  deercame  running  out.  .lust  as  they  drew  hack  to  shoot
it.  another  came  out.  and  then  another  and  another,  until  the  boys  got
confused  and  forgot  what  they  were  about.  In  those  days  all  the  deer
had  their  tails  hanging  down  like  other  animals,  but  as  a  buck  was
running  past  the  Wild  Roy  struck  its  tail  with  his  arrow  so  that  it
pointed  upward.  The  boys  thought  this  good  sport,  and  when  the
next  oik'  ran  past  the  Wild  Boy  struck  its  tail  so  that  it  stood  straight
up.  and  his  brother  struck  the  next  one  so  hard  with  his  arrow  that
the  deer's  tail  was  almost  curled  over  his  back.  The  deer  carries  his
tail  this  way  ever  since.  The  deer  came  running  past  until  the  last
one  had  come  out  of  the  hole  and  escaped  into  the  forest.  Then  came
droves  of  raccoons,  rabbits,  and  all  the  other  four-footed  animals — all
hut  the  hear,  because  there  was  no  bear  then.  Last  came  great  flocks
of  turkeys,  pigeons,  and  partridges  that  darkened  the  air  like  a  (loud
and  made  such  a  noise  with  their  wings  that  Kana'ti.  sitting  at  home,
heard  the  sound  like  distant  thunder  on  the  mountains  and  said  to  him-
self. "•  My  bad  boys  have  got  into  trouble;  T  must  go  and  see  what  they
are  doing.-' So  he  went  up  the  mountain,  and  when  he  came  to  the  place  where
he  kept  the  game  he  found  the  two  boys  standing  by  the  rock,  and  all
the  birds  and  animals  were  g-oue.     Kana'ti  was  furious,   but  without


244  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
saving  a  word  he  went  down  into  the  cave  and  kicked  the  covers  off
four  jars  in  one  corner,  when  out  swarmed  bedbugs,  fleas,  lice,  and
gnats,  and  got  all  over  the  boys.  They  screamed  with  pain  and  fright
and  tried  to  beat  off  the  insects,  but  the  thousands  of  vermin  crawled
over  them  and  bit  and  stung  them  until  both  dropped  down  nearly
dead.  Kana'ti  stood  looking  on  until  he  thought  they  had  been  pun-
ished enough,  when  he  knocked  off  the  vermin  and  made  the  boys  a
talk.  "Now,  you  rascals,"  said  he,  "you  have  always  had  plenty  to
eat  and  never  had  to  work  for  it.  Whenever  you  were  hungry  all  I
had  to  do  was  to  come  up  here  and  get  a  deer  or  a  turkey  and  bring  it
home  for  your  mother  to  cook;  but  now  you  have  let  out  all  the  ani-
mals, and  after  this  when  you  want  a  deer  to  eat  you  will  have  to  hunt
all  over  the  woods  for  it,  and  then  maybe  not  find  one.  Go  home  now
to  your  mother,  while  I  see  if  I  can  find  something  to  eat  for  supper."
When  the  boys  got  home  again  they  were  very  tired  and  hungry  and
asked  their  mother  for  something  to  eat.  "There  is  no  meat,"  said
Selu,  "  but  wait  a  little  while  and  I'll  get  you  something.'''  So  she took  a  basket  and  started  out  to  the  storehouse.  This  storehouse  was
built  upon  poles  high  up  from  the  ground,  to  keep  it  out  of  the  reach
of  animals,  and  there  was  a  ladder  to  climb  up  by,  and  one  door,  but
no  other  opening.  Every  day  when  Selu  got  ready  to  cook  the  dinner
she  would  go  out  to  the  storehouse  with  a  basket  and  bring  it  back
full  of  corn  and  beans.  The  boys  had  never  been  inside  the  storehouse,
so  wondered  where  all  the  corn  and  beans  could  come  from,  as  the
house  was  not  a  very  large  one;  so  as  soon  as  Selu  went  out  of  the
door  the  Wild  Boy  said  to  his  brother,  "Let's  go  and  see  what  she
does."  They  ran  around  and  climbed  up  at  the  back  of  the  storehouse
and  pulled  out  a  piece  of  clay  from  between  the  logs,  so  that  they
could  look  in.  There  they  saw  Selu  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room
with  the  basket  in  front  of  her  on  the  floor.  Leaning  over  the  basket,
she  rubbed  her  stomach — so — and  the  basket  was  half  full  of  corn.
Then  she  rubbed  under  her  armpits — so — and  the  basket  was  full  to
the  top  with  beans.  The  boys  looked  at  each  other  and  said,  "This
will  never  do;  our  mother  is  a  witch.  If  we  eat  any  of  that  it  will
poison  us.     We  must  kill  her."
When  the  boys  came  back  into  the  house,  she  knew  their  thoughts
before  they  spoke.  "  So  you  are  going  to  kill  me? "  said  Selu.  "  Yes,"
said  the  boys,  "you  are  a  witch."  "Well,"  said  their  mother,  "when
you  have  killed  me,  clear  a  large  piece  of  ground  in  front  of  the  house
and  drag  my  body  seven  times  around  the  circle.  Then  drag  me  seven
times  over  the  ground  inside  the  circle,  and  stay  up  all  night  and  watch,
and  in  the  morning  you  will  have  plenty  of  corn."  The  boys  killed her  with  their  clubs,  and  cut  off  her  head  and  put  it  up  on  the  roof  of
the  house  with  her  face  turned  to  the  west,  and  told  her  to  look  for  her
husband.     Then  thev  set  to  work  to  clear  the  ground  in  front  of  the


i   keyj  kana'ti   AND  ski.t  245
house,  bu<  instead  of  clearing  the  whole  piece  they  cleared  onlj  seven
little  spots.  This  is  why  corn  now  grows  only  in  a  few  places  instead
01  over  the  whole  world.  They  dragged  the  body  of  Selu  around  the
circle,  and  wherever  her  blood  fell  on  the  ground  the  corn  sprang  up.
But  instead  of  dragging  her  body  seven  times  across  the  ground  they
dragged  ii  over  onlj  twice,  which  is  the  reason  the  Indians  still  work
their  crop  but  twice.  The  two  brothers  sat  up  and  watched  their  coin
all  night,  and  in  the  morning  it  was  full  grown  and  ripe.
When  Kana'ti  came  home  at  last,  he  looked  around,  but  could  not  see
Selu  anywhere,  and  asked  the  boys  where  was  their  mother.  "She  was
a  witch,  and  we  killed  her."  said  the  boys;  •'there  is  her  head  up  there
on  top  of  the  house."  "When  he  saw  his  wife's  head  on  the  roof,  he
was  very  angry,  and  said,  ''I  won't  stay  with  you  any  longer:  I  am
going  to  the  Wolf  people."  So  he  started  off,  but  before,  he  had  gone far  the  Wild  Boy  changed  himself  again  to  a  tuft  of  down,  which  fell
on  Kana'tfs  shoulder.  When  Kana'ti  reached  the  settlement  of  the
Wolf  people,  they  were  holding  a  council  in  the  townhouse.  He  went
in  and  sat  down  with  the  tuft  of  bird's  down  on  his  shoulder,  but  he
never  noticed  it.  When  the  Wolf  chief  asked  him  his  business,  he
said:  "  I  have  two  bad  boys  at  home,  and  I  want  you  to  go  in  seven
days  from  now  and  play  ball  against  them."  Although  Kana'ti  spoke
as  though  he  wanted  them  to  play  a  game  of  ball,  the  Wolves  knew
that  he  meant  for  them  to  go  and  kill  the  two  boys.  They  promised  to
go.  Then  the  bird's  down  blew  off  from  Kana'tfs  shoulder,  and  the
smoke  carried  it  up  through  the  hole  in  the  roof  of  the  townhouse.
When  it  came  down  on  the  ground  outside,  the  Wild  Boy  took  his  right
shape  again  and  went  home  and  told  his  brother  all  that  he  had  heard
in  the  townhouse.  But  when  Kana'ti  left  the  Wolf  people,  he  did  not return  home,  but  went  on  farther.
The  boys  then  began  to  get  ready  for  the  Wolves,  and  the  Wild
Boy  —the  magician — told  his  brother  what  to  do.  They  ran  around
the  house  in  a  wide  circle  until  they  had  made  a  trail  all  around  it
excepting  on  the  side  from  which  the  Wolves  would  come,  where  they
left  a  small  open  space.  Then  they  made  four  large  bundles  of  arrows
and  placed  them  at  four  different  points  on  the  outside  of  the  circle,
after  which  they  hid  themselves  in  the  woods  and  waited  for  the
Wolves.  In  a  day  or  two  a  whole  party  of  Wolves  came  and  sur-
rounded the  house  to  kill  the  boys.  The  Wolves  did  not  notice  the
trail  around  the  house,  because  they  came  in  where  the  boys  had  left
the  opening,  but  the  moment  they  went  inside  the  circle  the  trail
changed  to  a  high  brush  fence  and  shut  them  in.  Then  the  boys  on
the  outside  took  their  arrows  and  began  shooting  them  down,  and  as
the  \\  olves  could  not  jump  over  the  fence  they  were  all  killed,  excepting
a  few  that  escaped  through  the  opening  into  a  great  swamp  close  by.
The  boys  ran  around  the  swamp,  and  a  circle  of  tire  sprang  up  in  their


246  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
tracks  and  set  fire  to  the  grass  and  bushes  and  burned  up  nearly  all
the  other  Wolves.  Only  two  or  three  got  away,  and  from  these  have
come  all  the  wolves  that  are  now  in  the  world.
Soon  afterward  some  strangers  from  a  distance,  who  had  heard  that
the  brothers  had  a  wonderful  grain  from  which  they  made  bread,  came
to  ask  for  some,  for  none  but  Selu  and  her  family  had  ever  known
corn  before.  The  boys  gave  them  seven  grains  of  corn,  which  they
told  them  to  plant  the  next  night  on  their  way  home,  sitting  up  all
night  to  watch  the  corn,  which  would  have  seven  ripe  ears  in  the
morning.  These  they  were  to  plant  the  next  night  and  watch  in
the  same  way,  and  so  on  every  night  until  they  reached  home,  when
they  would  have  corn  enough  to  supply  the  whole  people.  The
strangers  lived  seven  days'  journey  away.  They  took  the  seven  grains
and  watched  all  through  the  darkness  until  morning,  when  the}'  saw
seven  tall  stalks,  each  stalk  bearing  a  ripened  ear.  They  gathered  the
tars  and  went  on  their  way.  The  next  night  they  planted  all  their
corn,  and  guarded  it  as  before  until  daybreak,  when  they  found  an
abundant  increase.  But  the  way  was  long  and  the  sun  was  hot,  and
the  people  grew  tired.  On  the  last  night  before  reaching  home  they
fell  asleep,  and  in  the  morning  the  corn  they  had  planted  had  not  even
sprouted.  The}'  brought  with  them  to  their  settlement  what  corn
they  had  left  and  planted  it,  and  with  care  and  attention  were  able  to
raise  a  crop.  But  ever  since  the  corn  must  be  watched  and  tended
through  half  the  year,  which  before  would  grow  and  ripen  in  a  night.
As  Kana'ti  did  not  return,  the  boys  at  last  concluded  to  go  and  find
him.  The  Wild  Boy  took  a  gaming  wheel  and  rolled  it  toward  the
Darkening  land.  In  a  little  while  the  wheel  came  rolling  back,  and
the  boys  knew  their  father  was  not  there.  He  rolled  it  to  the  south
and  to  the  north,  and  each  time  the  wheel  came  back  to  him.  and  they
knew  their  father  was  not  there.  Then  he  rolled  it  toward  the  Sun-
land,  and  it  did  not  return.  "Our  father  is  there,"  said  the  Wild
Boy,  "let  us  go  and  find  him."  So  the  two  brothers  set  off  toward
the  east,  and  after  traveling  a  longtime  they  came  upon  Kana'ti  walk-
ing along  with  a  little  dog  by  his  side.  "You  bad  hoys,"  said  their
father,  "  have  you  come  here  V  "'Yes,"  they  answered,  "we  always
accomplish  what  we  start  out  to  do — we  are  men."  "This  clog  over-
took me  four  days  ago,"  then  said  Kana'ti,  but  the  boys  knew  that  the
dog  was  the  wheel  which  they  had  sent  after  him  to  find  him.  "Well,"
said  Kana'ti,  "  as  you  have  found  me,  we  may  as  well  travel  together,
but  I  shall  take  the  lead."
Soon  they  came  to  a  swamp,  and  Kana'ti  told  them  there  was  some-
thing dangerous  there  and  they  must  keep  away  from  it.  He  went
on  ahead,  but  as  soon  as  he  was  out  of  sight  the  Wild  Boy  said  to
his  brother.  "Come  and  let  us  see  what  is  in  the  swamp."  They
went  in  together,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  swamp  they  found  a  large


mooney]  kana'ti  and  selu  -J47
panther  asleep.  The  Wild  Hoy  got  <>ut  an  arrow  and  shot  the  panther
in  the  side  of  the  head.  The  panther  turned  his  head  and  the  other
boj  shot  him  on  that  side.  He  turned  his  head  away  again  and  the
two  brothers  sho(  together  fust,  fust,  tust!  But  the  panther  was  nol
hurt  by  the  arrow-  and  paid  no  more  attention  to  the  boys.  They
came  oul  of  the  swamp  and  soon  overtook  Kana'ti.  waiting  for  them.
"Did  you  find  it?"  asked  Kana'ti.  "Yes,"  said  the  boys,  "we  found
it.  but  it  never  hurl  us.  We  are  men."  Kana'ti  was  surprised,  but
said  nothing,  and  they  went  on  again.
After  a  while  lie  turned  to  them  and  said.  "Now  you  must  lie  careful.
We  are  coming  to  a  tribe  called  the  An&da'duiitaski  ("  Roasters,"  i.  e.,
cannibals),  and  if  thej  gel  you  they  will  put  you  into  a  pot  and  feast  on
you."'  Then  lie  went  on  ahead.  Soon  the  boys  eanie  to  a  tree  which
ha<l  Keen  struck  by  lightning,  and  the  Wild  Hoy  directed  his  brother  to
gather  some  of  the  splinters  from  the  tree  and  told  him  what  to  do
with  them.  In  a  little  while  they  came  to  the  settlement  of  the  can-
nibals, who,  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  hoys,  came  running  out,  crying,
"Good,  here  are  two  nice  fat  strangers.  Now  we'll  have  a  grand
feast!"  They  caught  the  hoys  and  dragged  them  into  the  townhouse,
and  sent  word  to  all  the  people  of  the  settlement  to  come  to  the  feast.
They  made  up  a  great  tire,  put  water  into  a  large  pot  and  set  it  to
boiling,  and  then  seized  the  Wild  Hoy  and  put  him  down  into  it.  His
brother  was  not  in  the  least  frightened  ami  made  no  attempt  to  escape,
hut  quietly  knelt  down  and  began  putting  the  splinters  into  the  tire,
as  if  to  make  it  burn  better.  When  the  cannibals  thought  the  meat
was  about  ready  they  lifted  the  pot  from  the  fire,  and  that  instant  a
blinding  light  rilled  the  townhouse,  and  the  lightning  began  to  dart
from  one  side"  to  the  other,  striking  down  the  cannibals  until  not  one
of  them  was  left  alive.  Then  the  lightning  went  upthrough  the  smoke-
hole,  and  the  next  moment  there  were  the  two  boys  standing  outside
the  townhouse  as  though  nothing  had  happened.  They  went  on  and
soon  met  Kana'ti.  who  seemed  much  surprised  to  see  them,  and  said,
••What!  are  you  here  again?"  "O,  yes.  we  never  give  up.  We  are
great  men!"  "What  did  the  cannibals  do  toj'OU?"  "We  nut  them
and  they  brought  us  to  their  townhouse.  but  they  never  hurt  u-.'*
Kana'ti  said  nothing  more,  and  they  went  on. *  *  -x-  -x  *  -::-  *
He  soon  got  nut  of  sight  of  the  boys,  but  they  kept  on  until  they
came  to  the  end  of  the  world,  where  the  sun  comes  out.  The  ski  was
just  coming  down  when  they  got  there,  but  they  waited  until  it  went
up  again,  and  then  they  went  through  and  climbed  up  on  tile  other
side.  There  they  found  Kana'ti  and  Selu  sitting  together.  The  old folk  received  them  kindly  and  were  glad  to  see  them,  telling  them
they  might  Stay  there  a  while,  but  then  they  must  go  to  live  where  the
sun  goes  down.     The  boy-  stayed  with  their  parents  seven  day-  and


248  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anx.19
then  went  on  toward  the  Darkening  land,  where  the}'  are  now.  We
call  them  Anisga'ya  Tsunsdi'  (The  Little  Men),  and  when  they  talk
to  each  other  we  hear  low  rolling  thunder  in  the  west.
After  Kana'ti's  boys  had  let  the  deer  out  from  the  cave  where  their
father  used  to  keep  them,  the  hunters  tramped  about  in  the  woods  for
a  long  time  without  finding  any  game,  so  that  the  people  were  very
hungry.  At  last  they  heard  that  the  Thunder  Boys  were  now  living
in  the  far  west,  beyond  the  sun  door,  and  that  if  they  were  sent  for
they  could  bring  back  the  game.  So  they  sent  messengers  for  them,
and  the  boys  came  and  sat  down  in  the  middle  of  the  townhouse  and
began  to  sing.
At  the  first  song  there  was  a  roaring  sound  like  a  strong  wind  in
the  northwest,  and  it  grew  louder  and  nearer  as  the  boys  sang  on,
until  at  the  seventh  song  a  whole  herd  of  deer,  led  by  a  large  buck,
came  out  from  the  woods.  The  boys  had  told  the  people  to  be  ready
with  their  bows  and  arrows,  and  when  the  song  was  ended  and  all  the
deer  were  close  around  the  townhouse,  the  hunters  shot  into  them  and
killed  as  many  as  they  needed  before  the  herd  could  get  back  into
the  timber.
Then  the  Thunder  Boys  went  back  to  the  Darkening  land,  but
before  the}'  left  they  taught  the  people  the  seven  songs  with  which  to
call  up  the  deer.  It  all  happened  so  long  ago  that  the  songs  are  now
forgotten — all  but  two,  which  the  hunters  still  sing  whenever  they  go after  deer.
WAHNENAUH]    VERSION
After  the  world  had  been  brought  up  from  under  the  water,  ''They
then  made  a  man  and  a  woman  and  led  them  around  the  edge  of  the
island.  On  arriving  at  the  starting  place  they  planted  some  corn,  and
then  told  the  man  and  woman  to  go  around  the  way  they  had  been
led.  This  they  did.  and  on  returning  they  found  the  corn  up  and
growing  nicely.  They  were  then  told  to  continue  the  circuit.  Each
trip  consumed  more  time.  At  last  the  corn  was  ripe  and  ready  for  use.1' *  *  *  *  *  *  *
Another  story  is  told  of  how  sin  came  into  the  world.  A  man  and
a  woman  reared  a  large  family  of  children  in  comfort  and  plenty,  with
very  little  trouble  about  providing  food  for  them.  Every  morning
the  father  went  forth  and  very  soon  returned  bringing  with  him  a
deer,  or  a  turkey,  or  some  other  animal  or  fowl.  At  the  same  time
the  mother  went  out  and  soon  returned  with  a  large  basket  filled  with
ears  of  corn  which  she  shelled  and  pounded  in  a  mortar,  thus  making
meal  for  bread.
When  the  children  grew  up,  seeing  with  what  apparent  ease  food
was  provided  for  them,  they  talked  to  each  other  about  it.  wondering
that  they  never  saw  such  things  as  their  parents  brought  in.     At  last


MOONEY]  KANA'TI     AM)     SELO  249
one  proposed  to  watch  when  their  parents  wenl  out  and  to  follow
them.
Accordingly  nexl  morning  the  plan  was  carried  out.  Those  who
followed  the  father  saw  him  stop  at  a  short  distance  from  the  cabin
and  turn  over  a  large  stone  that  appeared  to  he  carelessly  leaned
against  another.  On  looking  closely  they  saw  an  entrance  to  a  large
cave,  and  in  it  were  many  different  kinds  of  animals  and  birds,  suchas
their  father  had  sometimes  brought  in  for  food.  The  man  standing  at
the  entrance  called  a  deer,  which  was  lying  at  some  distance  and  hack
of  some  other  animals.  It  rose  immediately  as  it  heard  the  call  and
came  close  up  to  him.  He  picked  it  up,  closed  the  mouth  of  the  cave,
and  returned,  not  once  seeming  to  suspect  what  his  sons  had  done.
When  the  old  man  was  fairly  out  of  sight,  his  sons,  rejoicing  how
they  had  outwitted  him,  left  their  hiding  place  and  went  to  the  cave.
saying  they  would  show  the  old  folks  that  they,  too,  could  bring  in
something.  They  moved  the  stone  away,  though  it  was  very  heavy
and  they  were  obliged  to  use  all  their  united  strength.  When  the  cave
was  opened,  the  animals,  instead  of  waiting  to  be  picked  up,  all  made
a  rush  for  the  entrance,  and  leaping  past  the  frightened  and  bewildered
boys,  scattered  in  all  directions  and  disappeared  in  the  wilderness,
while  the  guilty  offenders  could  do  nothing  hut  gaze  in  stupified
amazement  as  they  saw  them  escape.  There  were  animals  of  all  kinds,
large  and  small — buffalo,  deer.  elk.  antelope,  raccoons,  and  squirrels;
even  catamounts  and  panthers,  wolves  and  foxes,  and  many  others,
all  fleeing  together.  At  the  same  time  birds  of  every  kind  were  seen
emerging  from  the  opening,  all  in  the  same  wild  confusion  as  the  quad-
ruped:— turkeys,  geese,  swans,  ducks,  quails,  eagles,  hawks,  and  owls.
Those  who  followed  the  mother  saw  her  enter  a  small  cabin,  which
they  had  never  seen  before,  and  close  the  door.  The  culprits  found  a
small  crack  through  which  they  could  peer.  They  saw  the  woman
place  a  basket  on  the  ground  and  standing  over  it  shake  herself  vigor-
ously, jumping  up  and  down,  when  lo  and  behold!  large  ears  of  corn
began  to  fall  into  the  basket.  When  it  was  well  tilled  she  took  it  up
and, placing  it  on  her  head,  came  out,  fastened  the  door,  and  prepared
their  breakfast  as  usual.  When  the  meal  had  Keen  finished  in  silence
the  man  spoke  to  hi~  children,  telling  them  that  he  was  aware  of  what
they  had  done:  that  now  he  must  die  and  they  would  be  obliged  to
provide  for  themselves.  He  made  bows  and  arrows  for  them,  then
sent  them  to  hunt  for  the  animals  which  they  had  turned  Loose.
Then  the  mother  told  them  that  as  they  hail  found  out  her  secret
she  could  do  nothing  more  for  them:  that  she  would  die.  and  they
must  drag  her  body  around  .over  the  ground;  that  wherever  her  body
was  dragged  corn  would  come  up.  Of  this  they  were  to  make  their
bread.  She  told  them  that  they  must  always  save  some  for  seed  and
plant  every  year.


250  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
4.   ORIGIN    OF   DISEASE   AND    MEDICINE
In  the  old  days  the  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  insects,  and  plants  could  all
talk,  and  they  and  the  people  lived  together  in  peace  and  friendship.
But  as  time  went  on  the  people  increased  so  rapidly  that  their  settle-
ments spread  over  the  whole  earth,  and  the  poor  animals  found  them-
selves beginning  to  be  cramped  for  room.  This  was  bad  enough,  but
to  make  it  worse  Man  invented  hows,  knives,  blowguns,  spears,  and
hooks,  and  began  to  slaughter  the  larger  animals,  birds,  and  fishes  for
their  flesh  or  their  skins,  while  the  smaller  creatures,  such  as  the
frogs  and  worms,  were  crushed  and  trodden  upon  without  thought,  out
of  pure  carelessness  or  contempt.  So  the  animals  resolved  to  consult
upon  measures  for  their  common  safety.
The  Bears  were  the  first  to  meet  in  council  in  their  townhouse  under
Kuwa'hi  mountain,  the  "Mulberry  place,"  and  the  old  White  Bear
chief  presided.  After  each  in  turn  had  complained  of  the  way  in  which
Man  killed  their  friends,  ate  their  flesh,  and  used  their  skins  for  his
own  purposes,  it  was  decided  to  begin  war  at  once  against  him.  Some
one  asked  what  weapons  Man  used  to  destroy  them.  "  Bows  and  arrows,
of  course,*'  cried  all  the  Bears  in  chorus.  "And  what  are  they  made
of  ] "  was  the  next  question.  "The  bow  of  wood,  and  the  string  of  our
entrails."  replied  one  of  the  Bears.  It  was  then  proposed  that  they
make  a  bow  and  some  arrows  and  see  if  the}T  could  not  use  the  same
weapons  against  Man  himself.  So  one  Bear  got  a  nice  piece  of  locust
wood  and  another  sacrificed  himself  for  the  good  of  the  rest  in  order
to  furnish  a  piece  of  his  entrails  for  the  string.  But  when  everything
was  ready  and  the  first  Bear  stepped  up  to  make  the  trial,  it  was  found
that  in  letting  the  arrow  fly  after  drawing  back  the  bow,  his  long  claws
caught  the  string  and  spoiled  the  shot.  This  was  annoying,  but  some
one  suggested  that  they  might  trim  his  claws,  which  was  accordingly
done,  and  on  a  second  trial  it  was  found  that  the  arrow  went  straight
to  the  mark.  But  here  the  chief,  the  old  White  Bear,  objected,  say-
ing it  was  necessary  that  they  should  have  long  claws  in  order  to  be
able  to  climb  trees.  "  One  of  us  has  already  died  to  furnish  the  bow-
string, and  if  we  now  cut  off  our  claws  we  must  all  starve  together.
It  is  better  to  trust  to  the  teeth  and  claws  that  nature  gave  us,  for  it  is
plain  that  man's  weapons  were  not  intended  for  us." No  one  could  think  of  any  better  plan,  so  the  old  chief  dismissed  the
council  and  the  Bears  dispersed  to  the  woods  and  thickets  without  hav-
ing concerted  any  waj'  to  prevent  the  increase  of  the  human  race.
Had  the  result  of  the  council  been  otherwise,  we  should  now  be  at  war
with  the  Bears,  but  as  it  is.  the  hunter  does  not  even  ask  the  Bear's  par- don when  he  kills  one.
The  Deer  next  held  a  council  under  their  chief,  the  Little  Deer,  and
after  some  talk  decided  to  send  rheumatism  to  every  hunter  who  should


booneyJ  ORIGIN    OF    DI8EA8E  251
kill  one  of  them  unless  he  took  care  to  ask  their  pardon  for  the  offense.
They  sent   notice  of  their  decision  to  the  nearest  settlement  of   Indians
and  told  them  at  the  same  time  what  to  do  when  necessity  forced  them
to  kill  one  of  the  Deer  tribe.    Now,  whenever  the  hunter  shoots  a  Deer,
the  Little  Deer,  who  is  Swift  as  the  wind  and  can  not  lie  wounded,  runs
quickly  up  to  the  -pot  and.  bending  over  the  Mood -stains,  asks  the  spirit
of  the  Deer  if  it  has  heard  the  prayer  of  the  hunter  for  pardon.  If  the
reply  be  "  Yes,"  all  is  well, and  the  Little  Deer  goes  on  his  way;  hut  if
the  reply  lie  "  No."  he  follows  on  the  trail  of  the  hunter,  guided  by  the
drops  of  blood  on  the  ground,  until  he  arrives  at  his  cabin  in  the  set-
tlement, when  the  Little  Deer  enters  invisibly  and  strikes  the  hunter
with  rheumatism,  so  that  he  becomes  at  once  a  helpless  cripple.  No
hunter  who  has  regard  for  his  health  ever  fails  to  ask  pardon  of  the
Deer  for  killing  it,  although  some  hunters  who  have  not  learned  the
prayer  may  try  to  turn  aside  the  Little  Deer  from 'his  pursuit  by
building  a  fire  behind  them  in  the  trail.
Next  came  the  Fishes  ami  Reptiles,  who  had  their  own  complaints
against  Man.  They  held  their  council  toe-ether  and  determined  to
make  their  victims  dream  of  snakes  twining  about  them  in  slimy  folds
and  blowing  foul  breath  in  their  faces,  or  to  make  them  dream  of
eating  raw  or  decaying  tish.so  that  they  would  lose  appetite,  sicken,
and  die.      This  is  why  people  dream  about  snakes  and  fish.
Finally  the  Birds,  Insects,  and  smaller  animals  came  together  for
the  same  purpose,  and  the  Grubworm  was  chief  of  the  council.  It
was  decided  that  each  in  turn  should  give  an  opinion,  and  then  they
would  vote  on  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  Man  was  guilty.
Seven  votes  should  he  enough  to  condemn  him.  One  after  another
denounced  Man's  cruelty  and  injustice  toward  the  other  animals  and
voted  in  favor  of  his  death.  The  Frog  spoke  first,  saying:  "  We
must  d<>  something  to  check  the  increase  of  the  race,  or  people  will
become  so  numerous  that  we  shall  he  crowded  from  off  the  earth.
See  how  they  have  kicked  me  about  because  I'm  ugly,  as  they  say.
until  my  back  is  covered  with  sores;"  and  here  he  showed  the  spots  on his  skin.  Next  came  the  Bird — no  one  remembers  now  which  one  it
was — who  condemned  Man  "because  he  burns  my  feet  off,"  meaning
the  way  in  which  the  hunter  barbecues  birds  by  impaling  them  on  a
stick  set  over  the  fire,  so  that  their  feathers  and  tender  feet  are  singed
off.  Others  followed  in  the  same  strain.  The  Ground-squirrel  alone
ventured  to  say  a  good  word  for  Man.  who  seldom  hurt  him  because
he  was  so  small,  but  this  made  the  others  so  angry  that  they  fell  upon
the  Ground-squirrel  and  tore  him  with  their  claws,  and  the  stripes  are
on  his  back  to  this  day.
They  began  then  to  devise  and  name  so  many  new  diseases,  one  after
another,  that  had  not  their  invention  at  last  failed  them,  no  one  of  the
human  race  would  have   been  aide  to  survive.      The  Grubworm  grew


252  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
constantly  more  pleased  as  the  name  of  each  disease  was  called  off,  until
at  last  they  reached  the  end  of  the  list,  when  some  one  proposed  to
make  menstruation  sometimes  fatal  to  women.  On  this  he  rose  up  in
his  place  and  cried:  "  Waddn' !  [Thanks!]  I'm  glad  some  more  of  them
will  die.  for  they  are  getting  so  thick  that  they  tread  on  me."  The
thought  fairly  made  him  shake  with  joy,  so  that  he  fell  over  backward
and  could  not  get  on  his  feet  again,  but  had  to  wriggle  off  on  his  back.
as  the  Grubworm  has  done  ever  since.
When  the  Plants,  who  were  friendly  to  Man,  heard  what  had  been
done  by  the  animals,  they  determined  to  defeat  the  latters'  evil  designs.
Each  Tree,  Shrub,  and  Herb,  down  even  to  the  Grasses  and  Mosses,
agreed  to  furnish  a  cure  for  some  one  of  the  diseases  named,  and  each
said:  "I  shall  appear  to  help  Man  when  he  calls  upon  me  in  his  need."
Thus  came  medicine;  and  the  plants,  every  one  of  which  has  its  use  if
we  only  knew  it.  furnish  the  remedy  to  counteract  the  evil  wrought
by  the  revengeful  animals.  Even  weeds  were  made  for  some  good
purpose,  which  we  must  find  out  for  ourselves.  When  the  doctor
does  not  know  what  medicine  to  use  for  a  sick  man  the  spirit  of  the
plant  tells  him.
5.  THE   DAUGHTER   OF  THE  SUN
The  Sun  lived  on  the  other  side  of  the  skyr  vault,  but  her  daughter
lived  in  the  middle  of  the  sky,  directly  above  the  earth,  and  every  day
as  the  Sun  was  climbing  along  the  sky  arch  to  the  west  she  used  to
stop  at  her  daughter's  house  for  dinner.
Now,  the  Sun  hated  the  people  on  the  earth,  because  they  could
never  look  straight  at  her  without  screwing  up  their  faces.  She  said
to  her  brother,  the  Moon,  "My  grandchildren  are  ugly;  they  grin  all
over  their  faces  when  they  look  at  me."  But  the  Moon  said,  "I  like
my  younger  brothers;  I  think  they  are  very  handsome" — because
they  always  smiled  pleasantly  when  they  saw  him  in  the  sky  at  night,
for  his  rays  were  milder.
The  Sun  was  jealous  and  planned  to  kill  all  the  people,  so  every  day
when  she  got  near  her  daughter's  house  she  sent  down  such  sultry rays  that  there  was  a  great  fever  and  the  people  died  by  hundreds,
until  everyone  had  lost  some  friend  and  there  was  fear  that  no  one
would  lie  left.  They  went  for  help  to  the  Little  Men,  who  said  the
only  way  to  save  themselves  was  to  kill  the  Sun.
The  Little  Men  made  medicine  and  changed  two  men  to  snakes,  the
Spreading-adder  and  the  Copperhead,  and  sent  them  to  watch  near  the
(l(Kir  of  the  daughter  of  the  Sun  to  bite  the  old  Sun  when  she  came
next  day.  They  went  together  and  hid  near  the  house  until  the  Sun
came,  but  when  the  Spreading-adder  was  about  to  spring,  the  bright
light  blinded  him  and  he  could  only  spit  out  yellow  slime,  as  he  does
to  this  day  when   he  tries  to  bite.     She  called  him  a  nasty  thing  and


hooney]  THK    DAUGHTER    OF    THE    si   N  253
went  by  into  the  bouse,  and  tin' Copperhead  crawled  off  without  trying
to  do  anything.
So  the  people  still  died  from  the  heat,  and  they  went  to  the  Little
Men  a  second  time  for  help.  The  Little  Men  made  medicine  again  and
Changed  one  man  into  the  great  I'ktena  and  another  into  the  Rattle- snake and  sent  them  to  watch  near  the  house  and  kill  the  old  Sun  when
she  came  Eor  dinner.  They  made  the  I'ktena  very  large,  with  borns on  his  head,  and  everyone  thought  he  would  lie  sure  to  do  the  work.
hut  the  Rattlesnake  was  so  quick  and  eager  that  he  got  ahead  and  coiled
up  just  outside  tin'  house,  and  when  the  Sun's  daughter  opened  the door  to  look  out  for  her  mother,  he  sprang  up  and  hit  her  and  she  fell
dead  in  the  doorway.  He  forgot  to  wait  for  the  old  Sun.  hut  went
hack  to  the  people,  and  the  I'ktena  was  so  very  angry  that  he  went hack.  too.  Since  then  we  pray  to  the  rattlesnake  and  do  not  kill  him,
because  he  is  kind  and  never  tries  to  bite  if  we  do  not  disturb  him.
The  Lktena  grew  angrier  all  the  time  and  very  dangerous,  so  that  if
he  even  looked  at  a  man.  that  man's  family  would  die.  After  a  long-
time the  people  held  a  council  and  decided  that  he  was  too  dangerous
to  he  with  them,  so  they  sent  him  up  to  Galun'lati,  and  he  is  there
now.  The  Spreading-adder,  the  Copperhead,  the  Rattlesnake,  and  the
Lktena  were  all  men.
When  the  Sun  found  her  daughter  dead,  she  went  into  the  house
and  grieved,  and  the  people  did  not  die  any  more,  but  now  the  world
was  dark  all  the  time,  because  the  Sun  would  not  come  out.  They
went  again  to  the  Little  Men.  and  these  told  them  that  if  they  wanted
the  Sun  to  come  out  again  they  must  bring  back  her  daughter  from
Tsusgina'i,  the  Ghost  country,  in  Usunhi'vi,  the  Darkening  land  in
the  west.     They  chose  seven  men  to  go,  and  gave  each  a  sourw   I  rod
a  hand-breadth  long.  The  Little  Men  told  them  they  must  take  a  box
with  them,  and  when  they  got  to  Tsusgina'i  they  would  find  all  the
ghosts  at  a  dance.  They  must  stand  outside  the  circle,  and  when  the
young  woman  passed  in  the  dance  they  must  strike  her  with  the  rods
and  she  would  fall  to  the  ground.  Then  they  must  put  her  into  the
box  and  bring  her  back  to  her  mother,  but  the}7  must  be  very  sure  not
to  open  the  box.  even  a  little  way,  until  they  were  home  again.
They  took  the  rods  and  a  box  and  traveled  seven  days  to  the  west
until  they  came  to  the  Darkening  land.  There  were  a  great  many
people  there,  and  they  were  having  a  dance  just  as  if  they  were  at
home  in  the  settlements.  The  young  woman  was  in  the.  outside  circle,
and  as  she  swung  around  to  where  the  seven  men  were  standing,  one
struck  her  with  his  rod  and  she  turned  her  head  and  saw  him.  As  she
came  around  the  second  time  another  touched  her  with  his  rod.  and
then  another  and  another,  until  at  the  seventh  round  she  fell  out  of
the  ring,  and  they  put  her  into  the  l>ox  and  closed  the  lid  fast.  The
other  ghosts  seemed  never  to  notice  what  had  happe   1.


254  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
They  took  up  the  box  and  .started  home  toward  the  east.  In  a  little
while  the  girl  came  to  life  again  and  begged  to  be  let  out  of  the  box,
but  the}'  made  no  answer  and  went  on.  Soon  she  called  again  and  said
she  was  hungry,  but  still  they  made  no  answer  and  went  on.  After
another  while  she  spoke  again  and  called  for  a  drink  and  pleaded  so
that  it  was  very  hard  to  listen  to  her,  but  the  men  who  carried  the  box
said  nothing  and  still  went  on.  When  at  last  they  were  very  near
home,  she  called  again  and  begged  them  to  raise  the  lid  just  a  little,
because  she  was  smothering.  They  were  afraid  she  was  really  dying
now,  so  they  lifted  the  lid  a  little  to  give  her  air,  but  as  they  did  so
there  was  a  fluttering  sound  inside  and  something  flew  past  them  into
the  thicket  and  they  heard  a  redbird  cry,  " Jewish/  Jewish!  hwish!"  in
the  bushes.  They  shut  clown  the  lid  and  went  on  again  to  the  settle-
ments, but  when  they  got  there  and  opened  the  box  it  was  empty.
So  we  know  the  Redbird  is  the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  and  if  the  men
had  kept  the  box  closed,  as  the  Little  Men  told  them  to  do,  they  would
have  brought  her  home  safely,  and  Ave  could  bring  back  our  other
friends  also  from  the  Ghost  country,  but  now  when  they  die  we  can
never  bring  them  back.
The  Sun  had  been  glad  when  they  started  to  the  Ghost  country,  but
when  they  came  back  without  her  daughter  she  grieved  and  cried,
"My  daughter,  my  daughter,"  and  wept  until  her  tears  made  a  flood
upon  the  earth,  and  the  people  were  afraid  the  world  would  be
drowned.  They  held  another  council,  and  sent  their  handsomest  young
men  and  women  to  amuse  her  so  that  she  would  stop  crying.  They
danced  before  the  Sun  and  sang  their  best  songs,  but  for  a  long  time
she  kept  her  face  covered  and  paid  no  attention,  until  at  last  the
drummer  suddenly  changed  the  song,  when  she  lifted  up  her  face,  and
was  so  pleased  at  the  sight  that  she  forgot  her  grief  and  smiled.
6.   HOW    THEY    BROUGHT    BACK    THE    TOBACCO
In  the  beginning  of  the  world,  when  people  and  animals  were  all  the
same,  there  was  only  one  tobacco  plant,  to  which  they  all  came  for
their  tobacco  until  the  DaguTku  geese  stole  it  and  carried  it  far  away
to  the  south.  The  people  were  suffering  without  it,  and  there  was  one
old  woman  who  grew  so  thin  and  weak  that  everybody  said  she  would
soon  die  unless  she  could  get  tobacco  to  keep  her  alive.
Different  animals  offered  to  go  for  it,  one  after  another,  the  larger
ones  first  and  then  the  smaller  ones,  but  the  Dagul  kfi  saw  and  killed
every  one  before  he  could  get  to  the  plant.  After  the  others  the  little
Mole  tried  to  reach  it  by  going  under  the  ground,  but  the  DaguTku
saw  his  track  and  killed  him  as  he  came  out.
At  last  the  Hummingbird  offered,  but  the  others  said  he  was  entirely
too  small  and  might  as  well  stay  at  home.  He  begged  them  to  let  him
try,  so  they  showed  him  a  plant  in  a  field  and  told  him  to  let  them  see


kookbt]  iinw    THEV    BROUGHT    BACK    THE    TOBACCO  255
how  he  would  go  aboul  it.  The  next  moment  lie  was  gone  and  they
saw  liim  sitting  <m  the  plant,  and  then  in  a  moment  he  was  back  again,
l>ut  do  one  had  seen  him  going  or  coming,  because  he  was  so  swift.
"This  is  the  way  I'll  do,"  said  the  Hummingbird,  so  they  let  him  try. Ilr  flew  off  to  the  east,  am!  when  he  came  in  sight  of  the  tobacco
the  Dagul  ku  were  watching  all  about  it,  but  they  could  not  see  him
because  he  was  so  small  and  tlew  so  swiftly.  Ilr  darted  down  on  the
plant  tea!  and  snatched  off  the  top  with  the  leaves  and  seeds,  and
was  off  again  before  the  Dagul  ku  knew  what  had  happened.  Before
he  got  home  with  the  tobacco  the  old  woman  had  fainted  and  they
thought  she  was  dead,  but  he  blew  the  smoke  into  her  nostrils,  and
with  a  cry  of  "  Tm'lu!  [Tobacco!]"  she  opened  her  eyes  and  was  alive
again. -I  I  OND    VEBSION
The  people  had  tobacco  in  the  beginning,  but  they  had  used  it  all,
and  there  was  great  suffering  for  want  of  it.  There  was  one  old
man  so  old  that  he  had  to  be  kept  alive  by  smoking,  and  as  his  son
did  not  want  to  see  him  die  he  decided  to  go  himself  to  try  and  get
some  more.  The  tobacco  country  was  far  in  the  south,  with  high
mountains  all  around  it,  and  the  passes  were  guarded, so  that  it  was
very  bard  to  get  into  it.  but  the  young  man  was  a  conjurer  and  was  not
afraid.  He  traveled  southward  until  he  came  to  the  mountains  on  the
border  of  the  tobacco  country.  Then  he  opened  his  medicine  bag  and
took  out  a  hummingbird  skin  and  put  it  over  himself  like  a  dress.
Now  he  was  a  hummingbird  and  flew  over  the  mountains  to  the  tobacco
field  and  pulled  some  of  the  leaves  and  seed  and  put  them  into  his
medicine  bag.  He  was  so  small  and  swift  that  the  guards,  whoever
they  were,  did  not  see  him,  and  when  he  had  taken  as  much  as  he  could
carry  he  tlew  back  over  the  mountains  in  the  same  way.  Then  he  took
off  the  hummingbird  skin  and  put  it  into  his  medicine  bag.  and  was  a
man  again.  He  started  home,  and  on  his  way  came  to  a  tree  that  had
a  hole  in  the  trunk,  like  a  door,  near  the  first  branches,  and  a  very
pretty  woman  was  looking  out  from  it.  Hestoppedand  tried  toclimb
the  tree,  but  although  he  was  a  good  climber  he  found  that  he  always
slipped  back.  He  put  on  a  pair  of  medicine  moccasins  from  his  pouch,
and  then  he  could  climb  the  tree,  but  when  he  reached  the  first  branches
he  looked  up  and  the  hole  was  still  as  far  away  as  before.  He  climbed
higher  and  higher,  but  every  time  he  looked  up  the  hole  seemed  to  be
farther  than  before,  until  at  last  he  was  tired  and  came  down  again.
When  he  reached  home  he  found  his  father  very  weak,  but  still  alive,
and  one  draw  at  the  pipe  made  him  strong  again.  The  people  planted
the  seed  and  have  had  tobacco  ever  since.
7.   THE  JOURNEY  TO   THE  SUNRISE
A  long  time  ago  several  young  men  made  up  their  minds  to  find  the
place  where  the  Sun    lives  and   see  what    the  Sun   is  like.      They  got


256  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ahn.19
ready  their  bows  and  arrows,  their  parched  corn  and  extra  moccasins,
and  started  out  toward  the  east.  At  first  they  met  tribes  they  knew,
then  they  came  to  tribes  they  had  only  heard  about,  and  at  last  to
others  of  which  they  had  never  heard.
There  was  a  tribe  of  root  eaters  and  another  of  acorn  eaters,  with
great  piles  of  acorn  shells  near  their  houses.  In  one  tribe  they  found
a  sick  man  dying,  and  were  told  it  was  the  custom  there  when  a  man
died  to  bury  his  wife  in  the  same  grave  with  him.  They  waited  until
he  was  dead,  when  thev  saw  his  friends  lower  the  body  into  a  great
pit,  so  deep  and  dark  that  from  the  top  they  could  not  see  the  bottom.
Then  a  rope  was  tied  around  the  woman's  body,  together  with  a  bun-
dle of  pine  knots,  a  lighted  pine  knot  was  put  into  her  hand,  and  she
was  lowered  into  the  pit  to  die  there  in  the  darkness  after  the  last  pine
knot  was  burned.
The  young  men  traveled  on  until  they  came  at  last  to  the  sunrise
place  where  the  sky  reaches  down  to  the  ground.  They  found  that  the
sky  was  an  arch  or  vault  of  solid  rock  hung  above  the  earth  and  was
always  swinging  up  and  down,  so  that  when  it  went  up  there  was  an
open  place  like  a  door  between  the  sky  and  ground,  and  when  it  swung
back  the  door  was  shut.  The  Sun  came  out  of  this  door  from  the  east
and  climbed  along  on  the  inside  of  the  arch.  It  had  a  human  figure,  but
was  too  bright  for  them  to  see  clearly  and  too  hot  to  come  very  near.
They  waited  until  the  Sun  had  come  out  and  then  tried  to  get  through
while  the  door  was  still  open,  but  just  as  the  first  one  was  in  the  door-
way the  rock  came  down  and  crushed  him.  The  other  six  were  afraid
to  try  it,  and  as  they  were  now  at  the  end  of  the  world  they  turned
around  and  started  back  again,  but  they  had  traveled  so  far  that  they
were  old  men  when  they  reached  home.
8.    THE    MOON   AND   THE   THUNDERS.
The  Sun  was  a  young  woman  and  lived  in  the  East,  while  her  brother,
the  Moon,  lived  in  the  West.  The  girl  had  a  lover  who  used  to  come
every  month  in  the  dark  of  the  moon  to  court  her.  He  would  come
at  night,  and  leave  before  daylight,  and  although  she  talked  with  him
she  could  not  see  his  face  in  the  dark,  and  he  would  not  tell  her  his
name,  until  she  was  wondering  all  the  time  who  it  could  be.  At  last
she  hit  upon  a  plan  to  find  out.  so  the  next  time  he  came,  as  they  were
sitting  together  in  the  dark  of  the  asi,  she  slyly  dipped  her  hand  into
the  cinders  and  ashes  of  the  fireplace  and  rubbed  it  over  his  face,  say-
ing. "Your  face  is  cold;  you  must  have  suffered  from  the  wind,'' and  pretending  to  be  very  sorry  for  him,  but  he  did  not  know  that
she  had  ashes  on  her  hand.  After  a  while  he  left  her  and  went  away
again.
The  next  night  when  the  Moon  came  up  in  the  sky  his  face  was  cov-
ered with  spots,  and  then  his  sister  knew  he  was  the  one  who  had  been


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGV NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.   X.ll
TAGWADlHi'




mooney]  THE    MOOM    AND    THE    THUNDERS  257
coming  to  see  her.  He  was  so  much  ashamed  to  have  her  know  it
thai  li«'  kept  us  far  away  as  he  could  at  the  other  end  of  the  skj  all  the
night.  Ever  since  he  tries  to  keep  a  long  way  behind  the  Sun.  and
when  he  doc-  sometimes  have  to  conic  near  her  in  the  west  he  makes
himself  as  thin  as  a  ribbon  so  thai  he  can  hardly  be  seen.
Some  old  people  saj  that  the  moon  is  a  hall  which  was  thrown  up
against  the  sky  in  a  game  a  lone-  time  ago.  They  say  that  two  towns
were  playing  against  each  other,  hut  one  of  them  had  tin'  best  runners
and  had  almost  won  the  came,  when  the  leader  of  tl   ther  side  picked
up  the  hall  with  his  hand-    a  thine-  that  is  not   allowed   in   the  game
and  tried  to  throw  it  to  the  goal,  hut  it   struck  against   the  solid   sky
vault  and  was  fastened  there,  to  remind  players  never  to  cheat.      When
the  moon  look-  -mall  and  pale  it  is  because  somi    has  handled  the
hall  unfairly,  and  for  this  reason  they  formerly  played  only  at  the
time  of  a  full  moon.
When  the  sun  or  moon  i-  eclipsed  it  is  because  a  great  frog  up  in
the  sky  is  trying  to  swallow  it.  Everybody  knows  this,  even  the
Creek-  and  the  other  tribes,  and  in  the  olden  times,  eighty  or  a  hun-
dred year-  ago,  before  the  great  medicine  men  were  all  dead,  when
ever  they  -aw  the  sun  grow  dark  the  people  would  come  together  and
tire  guns  and  heat  the  drum,  ami  in  a  little  while  tin-  would  frighten
off  the  greal  frog  ami  the  sun  would  he  all  right  again.
The  common  people  call  both  Sun  and  Moon  Nundd,  one  being
"Nunda  that  dwell-  in  the  day"  ami  the  other  "Nunda  that  dwell-  in
the  night,"  hut  the  priests  call  the  Sun  Su'tdlidiki',  ••Six-killer."  and
the  Moon  Gi '  yagu'ga,  though  nobody  knows  now  what  this  wurd  means.
or  why  they  use  these  name-.  Sometime-  people  ask  the  Moon  not  to
let  it  rain  or  -now  .
The  great  Thunder  ami  hi-  sons,  the  two  Thunder  boys,  live  far  in
the  west  above  the  sky  vault.  The  lightning  and  the  rainbow  are
their  beautiful  dress.  The  priests  pray  to  the  Thunder  and  call  him
the  Red  Man.  because  that  is  the  brightest  color  of  his  dress.  There
arc  other  Thunder-  that  live  lower  down,  in  the  cliffs  and  mountains,
and  under  waterfalls,  and  travel  on  invisible  bridges  from  one  high
peak  to  another  where  they  have  their  town  house-.  The  great  Thun-
ders above  the  sky  are  kind  and  helpful  when  we  pray  to  them,  hut
these  other-  are  always  plotting  mischief.  One  must  not  point  at  the
rainbow,  or  one'-  finger  will  swell  at  the  lower  joint.
9.   WHAT   THE  STARS  ARE   LIKE
There  are  different  opinion-  about  the  -tars.  Some  say  they  are
balls  of  light,  othei-  gaj  they  are  human,  but  most  people  say  they
are  living  creature-  covered  with  luminous  fur  or  feathers.
One  night  a  hunting  party  camping  in  the  mountain-  noticed  two
lights  like  large  star-  moving  alone-  the  top  of  a  distant  ridge.     They
19  eth— i'H   17


258  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
wondered  and  watched  until  the  light  disappeared  on  the  other  side.
The  next  night,  and  the  next,  they  saw  the  lights  again  moving  along
the  ridge,  and  after  talking  over  the  matter  decided  to  go  on  the  mor-
row and  try  to  learn  the  cause.  In  the  morning  they  started  out  and
went  until  they  came  to  the  ridge,  where,  after  searching  some  time.
they  found  two  strange  creatures  about  so  large  (making  a  circle  with
outstretched  arms),  with  round  bodies  covered  with  tine  fur  or  downy
feathers,  from  which  small  heads  stuck  out  like  the  heads  of  terrapins.
As  tlic  breeze  played  upon  these  feathers  showers  of  sparks  flew  out.
The  hunters  carried  the  strange  creatures  back  to  the  camp,  intend-
ing to  take  them  home  to  the  settlements  on  their  return.  They  kept
them  several  days  and  noticed  that  every  night  they  would  grow
bright  and  shine  like  great  stars,  although  by  day  they  were  (inly  balls
of  gray  fur.  except  when  the  wind  stirred  and  made  the  sparks  fly  out.
They  kept  very  quiet,  and  no  one  thought  of  their  trying  to  escape,
when,  on  the  seventh  night,  they  suddenly  rose  from  the  ground  like
balls  of  fire  and  were  soon  above  the  tops  of  the  trees.  Higher  and
higher  they  went,  while  the  wondering  hunters  watched,  until  at  last
they  were  only  two  bright  points  of  light  in  the  dark  sky,  and  then
the  hunters  knew  that  they  were  stars.    •
10.  ORIGIN   OF  THE   PLEIADES   AND   THE  PINE
Long  ago,  when  the  world  was  new,  there  were  seven  boys  who
used  to  spend  all  their  time  down  by  the  townhouse  playing  the
gatayu'sti  game,  rolling  a  .stone  wheel  along  the  ground  and  sliding  a curved  stick  after  it  to  strike  it.  Their  mothers  scolded,  but  it  did  no
good,  so  one  day  they  collected  some  gatayu'sti  stones  and  boiled them  in  the  pot  with  the  corn  for  dinner.  When  the  boys  came  home
hungry  their  mothers  dipped  out  the  stones  and  said.  ■•Since  you  like
the  gatayu'sti  better  than  the  cornfield,  take  the  stones  now  for  your
dinner." The  boys  were  very  angry,  and  went  down  to  the  townhouse,  say-
ing. "As  our  mothers  treat  us  this  way,  let  us  go  where  we  shall
never  trouble  them  any  more."  They  began  a  dance — some  say  it was  the  Feather  dance — and  went  round  and  round  the  townhouse,
praying  to  the  .spirits  to  help  them.  At  last  their  mothers  were
afraid  something  was  wrong  and  went  out  to  look  for  them.  They
saw  the  boys  still  dancing  around  the  townhouse.  and  as  they  watched
they  noticed  that  their  feet  were  off  the  earth,  and  that  with  every
round  they  rose  higher  and  higher  in  the  air.  They  ran  to  get  their
children,  but  it  was  too  late,  for  they  were  already  above  the  roof  of
the  townhouse — all  but  one,  whose  mother  managed  to  pull  him  down
with  the  gatayu'sti  pole,  but  he  struck  the  ground  with  such  force that  he  sank  into  it  and  the  earth  closed  over  him.
The  other  six  circled  higher  and  higher  until  they  went   up  to  the


ORIGIN    OF    STRAWBEEE]  ES  2  >9
sky,  where  we  see  them  now  as  the  Pleiades,  which  the  Cherokee
stiil  call  A.ni'tsutsa  (The  Boys).  The  people  grieved  long  after  them,
but  the  mother  whose  boy  had  gone  into  the  ground  came  every
morning  and  every  evening  to  cry  over  the  spot  until  the  earth  was
damp  with  her  tears.  At  hist  a  little  green  shoot  sprouted  up  and
gre^  day  by  day  until  it  became  the  tall  tree  that  we  call  now  the
pine,  and  the  pine  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  stars  and  holds  in
itself  the  same  bright  light.
n.   THE   MILKY   WAY
Some  people  in  the  south  hail  a  corn  mill,  in  which  they  pounded
thi'  corn  into  meal,  and  several  mornings  when  they  came  to  till  it  they
noticed  that  some  of  the  meal  had  been  stolen  d urine- the  night.  They
examined  the  ground  anil  found  the  tracks  of  a  doe'.  s(>  the  next  night
the\  watched,  and  when  the  doe-  came  from  the  north  and  began  to  eat
the  meal  out  of  the  howl  they  sprang  out  and  whipped  him.  lie  ran
off  howling  to  his  home  in  the  north,  with  the  meal  dropping  from  his
mouth  as  lie  ran,  and  leaving  behind  a  white  trail  where  now  weseethe
Milky  Way.  which  the  Cherokee  call  to  this  day  (ii  li'-utsun'stanufi'j  i.
■•  Where  the  doe-  ran."
12.  ORIGIN   OF  STRAWBERRIES
When  the  first  man  was  created  and  a  mate  was  given  to  him.  they
lived  together  very  happily  for  a  time,  hut  then  began  to  quarrel,  until
at  last  the  woman  left  her  husband  and  started  oh"  toward  Nund&gun'ja,
the  Sun  land,  in  the  east.  The  man  followed  alone  and  grieving,  but
the  woman  kept  on  steadily  ahead  and  never  looked  behind,  until
I'ne'  lanun'hi,  the  great  Apportioner  (the  Sun),  took  pity  on  him  and
asked  him  if  he  was  still  angry  with  his  wife.  lb'  said  he  was  not.  and
I'ne'  lanun'hi  then  asked  him  if  he  would  like  to  have  her  hack  again,
to  which  lie  eagerly  answered  yes.
So  I'ne'  lanun'hi  caused  a  patch  of  the  finest  ripe  huckleberries  to
spring  up  alone-  the  path  in  front  of  the  woman,  but  she  passed  by
without  paying  any  attention  to  them.  Farther  on  he  put  a  clump  of
blackberries,  but  these  also  she  refused  to  notice.     Other  fruits,  one,
two,  and  three,  and  then  some  trees  covered  with  beautiful  red  service
berries,  were  placed  beside  the  path  to  tempt  her.  hut  she  still  went  on
until  suddenly  she  saw  in  front  a  patch  of  large  ripe  strawberries,  the
first  ever  known.  She  stooped  to  gather  a  few  to  eat.  and  as  she  picked
them  -he  chanced  to  turn  her  face  to  the  west,  and  at  once  the  memory
of  her  husband  came  hack  to  her  and  she  found  herself  unable  to  go
on.  She  sat  down,  hut  the  longer  she  waited  the  stronger  became  her
desire  for  her  husband,  and  at  last  she  gathered  a  hunch  of  the  finest
berries  and  started  back  alone-  the  path  to  give  them  to  him.  He  met
her  kindly  and  they  went  home  together.


260  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
13.   THE   GREAT   YELLOW-JACKET:   ORIGIN    OF   FISH   AND    FROGS
A  long  time  ago  the  people  of  the  old  town  of  Kanu'ga  la'yi  ("  Brier
place,"  or  Briertown),  on  Nantahala  river,  in  the  present  Macon
county.  North  Carolina,  were  much  annoyed  by  a  great  insect  called
U'la'gu.',  as  large  as  a  house,  which  used  to  come  from  some  secret
hiding  place,  and  darting  swiftly  through  the  air,  would  snap  up  chil-
dren from  their  play  and  carry  them  away.  It  was  unlike  any  other
insect  ever  known,  and  the  people  tried  many  times  to  track  it  to  its
home,  but  it  was  too  swift  to  be  followed.
They  killed  a  squirrel  and  tied  a  white  string  to  it,  so  that  its  course
could  be  followed  with  the  eye.  as  bee  hunters  follow  the  flight  of  a
lice  to  its  tree.  The  U'la'gu'  came  and  carried  off  the  squirrel  with
the  string  hanging  to  it,  but  darted  away  so  swiftly  through  the  air
that  it  was  out  of  sight  in  a  moment.  They  killed  a  turkey  and  put  a
longer  white  string  to  it,  and  the  U'la'gvi'  came  and  took  the  turkey, but  was  gone  again  before  they  could  see  in  what  direction  it  flew.
They  took  a  deer  ham  and  tied  a  white  string  to  it.  and  again  the
U'la'gu'  swooped  down  and  bore  it  off  so  swiftly  that  it  could  not  be followed.  At  last  they  killed  a  yearling  deer  and  tied  a  very  long
white  string  to  it.  The  U'la'gu'  came  again  and  seized  the  deer,  but this  time  the  load  was  so  heavy  that  it  had  to  fly  slowly  and  so  low
down  that  the  string  could  be  plainly  seen.
The  hunters  got  together  for  the  pursuit.  They  followed  it  along
a  ridge  to  the  east  until  they  came  near  where  Franklin  now  is,  when,
on  looking  across  the  valley  to  the  other  side,  they  saw  the  nest  of
the  U'la'gu'  in  a  large  cave  in  the  rocks.  On  this  they  raised  a  great shout  and  made  their  way  rapidly  down  the  mountain  and  across  to  the
cave.  The  nest  had  the  entrance  below  with  tiers  of  cells  built  up  one
above  another  to  the  roof  of  the  cave.  The  great  U'la'gu'  was  there,
with  thousands  of  smaller  ones,  that  we  now  call  yellow-jackets.  The
hunters  built  tires  around  the  hole,  so  that  the  smoke  filled  the  cave
and  smothered  the  great  insect  and  multitudes  of  the  smaller  ones,
but  others  which  were  outside  the  cave  were  not  killed,  and  these
escaped  and  increased  until  now  the  yellow- jackets,  which  before
were  unknown,  are  all  over  the  world.  The  people  called  the  cave
Tsgagun'yi.  "  Where  the  yellow-jacket  was."  and  the  place  from  which
they  first  saw  the  nest  they  called  Atahi'ta.  "  Where  they  shouted,"  and these  are  their  names  today.
They  say  also  that  all  the  fish  and  frogs  came  from  a  great  monster
fish  and  frog  which  did  much  damage  until  at  last  they  were  killed
by  the  people,  who  cut  them  up  into  little  pieces  which  were  thrown
into  the  water  and  afterward  took  shape  as  the  smaller  fishes  and
frous.


THE    F01  RFOOTED   TRIBES  26  1
14.   THE   DELUGE
A  longtime  ago  a  man  bad  a  dog,  which  began  to  go  down  to  the
river  cxn\  . l:i \  and  look  at  the  water  and  howl.  At  last  the  man
was  angry  and  scolded  the  dog,  which  then  spoke  to  bira  and  said:
"Very  soon  there  is  going  to  be  a  great  freshet  and  the  water  will
come  so  high  that  everybody  will  lie  drowned;  hut  if  you  will  make  a
raft  to  gel  upon  when  the  rain  comes  you  can  lie  saved,  but  you  must
first  throw  me  into  the  water."  The  man  did  not  believe  it.  and  the
dog  said,  "If  you  want  a  sign  that  I  speak  the  truth,  look  at  the  hack
of  my  neck."  lie  looked  and  saw  that  the  dog's  neck  had  the  skin
worn  oil'  so  that  the  hones  stuck  out.
Then  lie  believed  the  dog,  and  began  to  build  a  raft.  Soon  the  rain
came  and  he  took  his  family,  with  plenty  of  provisions,  and  they  all
got  upon  it.  It  rained  for  a  long  time,  and  the  water  rose  until  the
mountains  were  covered  and  all  the  people  in  the  world  were  drow  ned.
Then  the  rain  stopped  and  the  waters  went  down  again,  until  at  last
it  was  safe  to  come  oil  the  raft.  Now  there  was  no  one  alive  hut  the
man  ami  his  family,  but  one  day  they  heard  a  sound  of  dancing  and
shouting  on  the  other  side  of  the  ridge.  The  man  climbed  to  the  top
and  looked  over;  everything  was  still,  hut  all  along  the  valley  he  saw
great  piles  of  hones  of  the  people  who  had  been  drowned,  and  then
he  knew  that  the  ghosts  had  been  dancing.
Quadruped  Myths
15.  the  fourfooted  tribes
In  Cherokee  mythology,  as  in  that  of  Indian  tribes  generally,  there
is  no  essential  difference  between  men  and  animals.  In  the  primal
genesis  period  they  seem  to  he  completely  undifferentiated,  and  we
find  all  creatures  alike  living  and  working  together  in  harmony  and
mutual  helpfulness  until  man.  by  his  aggressiveness  and  disregard  for
the  rights  of  the  others,  provokes  their  hostility,  when  insects,  birds,
fishes,  reptiles,  and  fourfooted  beasts  join  forces  against  him  (see
story.  ••(  )rigin  of  Disease  and  Medicine"").  Henceforth  their  lives  are
apart,  but  the  difference  is  always  one  of  decree  only.  The  animals,
like  the  people,  are  organized  into  tribes  and  have  like  them  their
chief-  and  townhouses,  their  councils  and  ballplays,  and  the  same
hereafter  in  the  Darkening  land  of  Qsunhi'yi.  Man  is  still  the  para-
mount power,  and  hunts  and  slaughters  the  others  as  his  own  necessi
tie-  compel,  hut  is  obliged  to  satisfy  the  animal  tribes  in  every
instance,  very  much  as  a  murder  is  compounded  for,  according  to  the
Indian  system,  by  "covering  the  hones  of  the  dead"  with  presents  for the  bereaved  relatives.
This  pardon  to  the  hunter  is  made  the  easier  through  a  peculiar


262  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
doctrine  of  reincarnation,  according  to  which,  as  explained  by  the
shamans,  there  is  assigned  to  every  animal  a  definite  life  term  which
can  not  be  curtailed  by  violent  means.  If  it  is  killed  before  the  expi-
ration of  the  allotted  time  the  death  is  only  temporary  and  the  body
is  immediately  resurrected  in  its  proper  shape  from  the  blood  (Imps,
and  the  animal  continues  its  existence  until  the  end  of  the  predestined
period,  when  the  body  is  finally  dissolved  and  the  liberated  spirit  goes
to  join  its  kindred  shades  in  tin1  Darkening  land.  This  idea  appears
in  the  story  of  the  bear  man  and  in  the  belief  concerning  the  Little
Deer.  Death  is  thus  but  a  temporary  accident  and  the  killing  a  mere
minor  crime.  By  some  priests  it  is  held  that  there  are  seven  succes-
sive reanimations  before  the  final  end.
Certain  supernatural  personages,  Kana'ti  and  Tsul'kalii'  (see  the myths),  have  dominion  over  the  animals,  and  are  therefore  regarded
as  the  distinctive  gods  of  the  hunter.  Kana'ti  at  one  time  kept  the
game  animals,  as  well  as  the  pestiferous  insects,  shut  up  in  a  cave
under  ground,  from  which  they  were  released  by  his  undutiful  sons.
The  primeval  animals — the  actors  in  the  animal  myths  and  the  pred-
ecessors of  the  existing  species — are  believed  to  have  been  much
larger,  stronger,  and  cleverer  than  their  successors  of  the  present
day.  In  these  myths  we  find  the  Indian  explanation  of  certain  pecu-
liarities of  form,  color,  or  habit,  and  the  various  animals  are  always
consistently  represented  as  acting  in  accordance  with  their  well-known
characteristics.
First  and  most  prominent  in  the  animal  myths  is  the  Rabbit  (  Tsisfat),
who  figures  always  as  a  trickster  and  deceiver,  generally  malicious,
but  often  beaten  at  his  own  game  by  those  whom  he  had  intended  to
victimize.  The  connection  of  the  rabbit  with  the  dawn  god  and  the
relation  of  the  Indian  myths  to  the  stories  current  among  the  southern
negroes  are  discussed  in  another  place.  Ball  players  while  in  train-
ing are  forbidden  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  rabbit,  because  this  animal  so
easily  becomes  confused  in  running.  On  the  other  hand,  their  spies
seek  opportunity  to  strew  along  the  path  which  must  be  taken  by
their  rivals  a  soup  made  of  rabbit  hamstrings,  with  the  purpose  of
rendering  them  timorous  in  action.
In  a  ball  game  between  the  birds  and  the  fourfooted  animals  (see
story)  the  Bat,  which  took  sides  with  the  birds,  is  said  to  have  won  the
victory  for  his  party  by  his  superior  dodging  abilities.  For  this  rea-
son the  wings  or  sometimes  the  stuffed  skin  of  the  bat  are  tied  to  the
implements  used  in  the  game  to  insure  success  for  the  players.  Accord-
ing to  the  same  myth  the  Flying  Squirrel  (  Tewa)  also  aided  in  securing
the  victory,  and  hence  both  these  animals  are  still  invoked  by  the  ball
player.  The  meat  of  the  common  gray  squirrel  (stil&'U)  is  forbidden
to  rheumatic  patients,  on  account  of  the  squirrel's  habit  of  assuming
a  cramped  position  when  eating.     The  stripes  upon  the  back  of  the


THE    FOURFOOTED    TRIBES  263
ground  squirrel  (kiyu'  ga)  are  the  mark  of  scratches  made  by  the  angry
animals  at  a  memorable  council  in  which  be  took  ii  upon  himself  to
say  a  good  word  for  the  archenemy,  Man  (see  "  ( )rigin  of  1  disease  and
Medicine").  The  peculiarities  of  the  mink  (sufigi)  ai-e  accounted  for  by
another  storj  .
The  buffalo,  the  largest  game  animal  of  America,  was  hunted  in  the
southern  Alleghenj  region  until  almost  the  close  of  the  last  century,
the  particular  species  being  probably  that  known  in  th<'  West  as  the
wood  or  mountain  buffalo.  The  name  in  use  among  the  principal  gulf
tribes  was  practically  tin-  same,  and  can  not  be  analyzed,  viz,  Cherokee,
//I'ntst'i';  Hichitee, ya'nasi;  Creek, ySna'sa;  Choctaw, yaiiask.  Although
the  flesh  <>t'  the  buffalo  was  eaten,  its  skin  dressed  for  blankets  and  bed
coverings,  its  lone-  hair  woven  into  belts,  and  its  horns  carved  into
spoons,  it  is  yet  strangely  absent  from  Cherokee  folklore.  So  far  as
is  known  it  is  mentioned  in  hut  a  single  one  of  the  sacred  formula-,  in
which  a  person  under  treatment  for  rheumatism  is  forbidden  to  eat
the  meat,  touch  the  >kin.  or  use  a  spoon  made  from  the  horn  of  the
buffalo,  upon  the  ground  of  an  occult  connection  between  the  habitual
cramped  attitude  of  a  rheumatic  and  the  natural  "hump"  of  that animal.
The  elk  is  known,  probably  by  report,  under  the  name  of  a  <<■<'
,'ijir,i.  "great  deer",  but  there  is  no  myth  or  folklore  in  connection with  it.
The  deer.  awl',  which  is  still  common  in  the  mountains,  was  the
principal  dependence  of  the  Cherokee  hunter,  and  is  consequently
prominent  in  myth,  folklore,  and  ceremonial.  One  of  the  seven
gentes  of  the  tribe  i-  named  from  it  (Ani'-Kawf,  "Deer  People'*).
According  to  a  myth  given  elsewhere,  the  deer  won  hi-  horn-  in  a  suc-
cessful race  with  the  rabbit.  Rheumatism  is  usually  ascribed  to  the
work  of  revengeful  deer  ghosts,  which  the  hunter  has  neglected  to
placate,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  aid  of  the  deer  is  invoked  against
frostbite,  as  its  feet  are  believed  to  be  immune  from  injuiw  by  frost.
'I'iie  wolf,  the  fox.  and  the  opossum  are  also  invoked  for  this  purpose, and  for  the  same  reason.  When  the  redrool  {Ceanothus  americanus)
put-  forth  it-  leaves  the  people  say  the  young  fawn-  are  then  in  the
mountains.  On  killing  a  deer  the  hunter  always  .ait-  out  the  ham-
string from  the  hind  quarter  and  throws' it  away,  for  fear  that  if
he  ate  it  he  would  thereafter  tire  easilj  in  traveling.
The  powerful   chief  of    the  deer  tribe   i-    the   A  wi'   Usdi',  or   ••Little
Deer,"  who  is  invisible  to  all  except  the  greatest  masters  of  the
hunting  secrets,  and  can  be  wounded  only  by  the  hunter  who  ha-  sup-
plemented years  of  occult  study  with  frequent  fasts  and  lonely  vigils.
The  Little  Deer  keeps  constant  protecting  watch  over  hi-  subjects,  and
sees  well  to  it  that  not  one  is  ever  killed  in  wantonness.  When  a  deer
i-  -hot  l>v  tin'  hunter  the  Little  Deer  know-  it  at  once  and  i-  instantly


264  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.akk.19
at  the  spot.  Bending  low  his  head  he  asks  of  the  blood  stains  upon
the  ground  if  they  have  heard  -i.  e.,  if  the  hunter  has  asked  pardon
for  the  life  that  he  has  taken.  If  the  formulistic  prayer  has  been  made,
all  i>  well,  because  the  necessary  sacrifice  has  been  atoned  for;  but  if
otherwise,  the  Little  Deer  tracks  the  hunter  to  his  house  by  the  blood
drops  along  the  trail,  and.  unseen  and  unsuspected,  puts  into  his  body
the  spirit  of  rheumatism  that  shall  rack  him  with  aches  and  pains  from
that  time  henceforth.  As  seen  at  rare  intervals  —perhaps  once  in  a
lonu'  lifetime — the  Little  Deer  is  pure  white  and  about  the  size  of  a
.small  doy,  has  branching  antlers,  and  is  always  in  company  with  a  large
herd  of  deer.  Even  though  shot  by  the  master  hunter,  he  comes  to  life
again,  being  immortal,  but  the  fortunate  huntsman  who  can  thus
make  prize  of  his  antlers  has  in  them  an  unfailing  talisman  that  brings
him  success  in  the  chase  forever  after.  The  smallest  portion  of  one
of  those  horns  of  the  Little  Deer,  when  properly  consecrated,  attracts
the  deer  to  the  hunter,  and  when  exposed  from  the  wrapping  dazes
them  so  that  they  forget  to  run  and  thus  become  an  easy  prey.
Like  the  Ulunsu'tl  stone  (see  number  50),  it  is  a  dangerous  prize  when
not  treated  with  proper  respect,  and  is — or  was — kept  always  in  a  secret
place  away  from  the  house  to  guard  against  sacrilegious  handling.
Somewhat  similar  talismanic  power  attached  to  the  down  from  the
young  antler  of  the  deer  when  properly  consecrated.  So  firm  was
the  belief  that  it  had  influence  over  •"anything  about  a  deer"  that
eighty  and  a  hundred  years  ago  even  white  traders  used  to  bargain
with  the  Indians  for  such  charms  in  order  to  increase  their  store  of
deerskins  by  drawing  the  trade  to  themselves.  The  faith  in  the  exist-
ence of  the  miraculous  Little  Deer  is  almost  as  strong  and  universal
to-day  among  the  older  Cherokee  as  is  the  belief  in  a  future  life.
The  bears  (i/i'iiii'i)  are  transformed  Cherokee  of  the  old  clan  of  the
Ani'-Tsa'guhi  (see  story.  "Origin  of  the  Bear").  Their  chief  is  the
White  Bear,  who  lives  at  Kuwa'hi,  •"Mulberry  place."  one  of  the  high peaks  of  the  Great  Smoky  mountains,  near  to  the  enchanted  lake  of
Atag&'hl  (see  number  ti!>).  to  which  the  wounded  bears  go  to  lie  cured  of
their  hurts.  Under  Kuwa'hi  and  each  of  three  other  peaks  in  the  same
mountain  region  the  bears  have  townhouses,  where  they  congregate
and  hold  dances  every  fall  before  retiring  to  their  dens  for  the  winter.
Being  really  human,  they  can  talk  if  they  only  would,  and  once  a
mother  bear  was  heard  singing  to  her  cub  in  words  which  the  hunter
understood.  There  is  one  variety  known  as  JcaM^-gikwLhi'ta,  "long
hams."  described  as  a  large  black  bear  with  long  legs  and  small  feet,
which  is  always  lean,  and  which  the  hunter  does  not  care  to  shoot,  pos-
sibly on  account  of  its  leanness.  It  is  believed  that  new-born  cubs  are
hairless,  like  mice.
The  wolf  ()/',/'  ya)  is  revered  as  the  hunter  and  watchdog  of  Kana'ti.
and  the  largest  yens  in  the  tribe  bears  the  name  of  Ani'-wa'  ya,  "Wolf


THE    FOURFOOTED    TRIBES  265
people."  The  ordinary  ( Iherokee  w  ill  never  kill  one  if  he  can  possibly avoid  it,  but  will  let  the  animal  go  by  unharmed,  believing  that  the
kindred  of  a  slain  wolf  will  surely  revenge  his  death,  and  that  the
weapon  with  which  the  deed  is  done  will  be  rendered  worthless  for
further  shooting  until  cleaned  and  exorcised  by  a  medicine  man.  ( ler
tain  persons,  however,  having  knowledge  of  the  proper  atonement
rites,  may  kill  wolves  with  impunity,  and  are  hired  for  this  purpose
t>\  others  who  have  suffered  from  raids  upon  their  fish  traps  or  their
stock.  Like  the  eagle  killer  (see  "'The  BirdTi'ibes"),  the  professional
wolf  killer,  after  killing  one  of  these  animals,  addresses  to  it  a  prayer
in  which  he  seeks  to  turn  aside  the  vengeance  of  the  tribe  by  laying
the  burden  of  blame  upon  the  people  of  some  other  settlement.  lie
then  unscrews  the  barrel  of  his  gun  and  inserts  into  it  seven  small  sour-
wood  rods  heated  over  the  fire,  and  allows  it  to  remain  thus  overnight
in  the  running  stream;  in  the  morning  the  rods  are  taken  out  and  the
barrel  is  thoroughly  dried  and  cleaned.
The  dog  (gili'),  although  as  much  a  part  of  Indian  life  among  the
Cherokee  as  in  other  tribes,  hardly  appears  in  folklore.  One  myth
makes  him  responsible  for  the  milky  way:  another  represents  him  as
driving  the  wolf  from  the  comfortable  house  lire  and  taking  the  place
for  himself.  He  figures  also  in  connection  with  the  deluge.  There  is
no  tradition  of  the  introduction  of  the  horse  (sd'gwdli,  iromasd1 'gwdlihu' ',
"a  pack  or  burden")  or  of  the  cow  (wa''ka,  from  the  Spanish,  vaca). The  hog  is  called  sikiod,  this  being  originally  the  name  of  the  opossum,
which  somewhat  resembles  it  in  expression,  and  which  is  now  distin
guished  as  sikwd  utse'tsti,  "grinning  sikwa."  In  the  same  wa\  the
-hce  p.  another  introduced  animal,  is  called  a  "•/'  unddt  'net,"  woolly  deer";
the  goat,  dwi'  alianu'l&M,  "bearded  deer,"  and  the  mule,  " sd'gwd'li
digu'landhi'ta,  "long-eared  horse."  The  cat,  also  obtained  from  the
whites,  is  called  wesd,  an  attempt  at  the  English  "pussy."  When  it
purrs  by  the  fireside,  the  children  say  it  is  counting  in  Cherokee,
"  ta'ladvl ',  in'iu'iji.  ta'ladu',  nurHgt"  "sixteen,  four,  sixteen,  four."  The
elephant,  which  a  few  of  the  Cherokee  have  seen  in  show-,  is  called
by  them  Je&ma'md  u'tdnu,  "great  butterfly,"  from  the  supposed  resem-
blance of  its  long  trunk  and  flapping  ears  to  the  proboscis  and  wines
<>1  that  insect.  The  anatomical  peculiarities  of  the  opossum,  of  both
sexes,  are  the  subject  of  much  curious  speculation  among  the  Indians,
many  of  whom  believe  that  its  young  are  produced  without  an)  help
from  the  male.     It  occurs  in  one  or  two  of  the  minor  myths.
The  fox  (tsu''ld)  is  mentioned  in  one  of  the  formulas,  but  doc-  no appear  in  the  tribal  folklore.  The  black  fox  is  known  by  a  differenf
name  {in&'U).  The  odor  of  the  skunk  (dUd')  is  believed  to  keep  off
contagious  diseases,  and  the  scent  bag  is  therefore  taken  out  and
hung  over  the  doorway,  a  small  hole  being  pierced  in  it  in  order  that
the  content-    may  ooze  out   upon  the  timbers.     At   times,  as  in  the


266  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.ANN.19
smallpox  epidemic  of  1S66,  the  entire  body  of  the  animal  was  thus
hung  up,  and  in  some  eases,  as  :ui  additional  safeguard,  the  meat  was
rooked  and  eaten  and  the  oil  rubbed  over  the  skin  of  the  person.  The
underlying  idea  is  that  the  fetid  smell  repels  the  disease  spirit,  and
upon  the  same  principle  the  buzzard,  which  is  so  evidently  superior  to
carrion  smells,  is  held  to  he  powerful  against  the  same  diseases.
The  beaver  (dd'yi),  by  reason  of  its  well-known  gnawing  ability,
against  which  even  the  hardest  wood  is  not  proof,  is  invoked  on  behalf
of  young  children  just  getting  their  permanent  teeth.  According  to
the  little  formula  which  is  familiar  to  nearly  every  mother  in  the  tribe,
when  the  loosened  milk  tooth  is  pulled  out  or  drops  out  of  itself,  the
child  runs  with  it  around  the  house,  repeating  four  times,  "  Dd'yi,
sl'nitu'  (Beaver,  put  a  new  tooth  into  my  jaw)'*  after  which  he  throws the  tooth  upon  the  roof  of  the  house.
In  a  characteristic  song  formula  to  prevent  frostbite  the  traveler,
before  starting  out  on  a  cold  winter  morning,  rubs  his  feet  in  the  ashes
of  the  tire  and  sings  a  song  of  four  verses,  by  means  of  which,  accord-
ing to  the  Indian  idea,  he  acquires  in  turn  the  cold-defying  powers  of
the  wolf,  fleer,  fox,  and  opossum,  four  animals  whose  feet,  it  is  held,
are  never  frostbitten.  After  each  verse  he  imitates  the  cry  and  the
action  of  the  animal.  The  words  used  are  archaic  in  form  and  may  be
rendered  "'I  become  a  real  wolf,"  etc.     The  song  runs:
Txini'ir<i''ij(t-tj<i'  (repeated  four  times),  wa-\-a!  (prolonged  howl).  (Imitates  a
wolf  pawing  the  ground  with  Ins  feet. )
Tsd.fi' -ha/ vA-ye'  (repeated  four  times),  sauh!  sauh!  sauh!  smth.'  (Imitates  call  and
jumping  of  a  deer.)
TsiiH/-t.iii/'/ii-)jn'  (repeated  four  times),  gaih!  gaih!  gaih!  >j<iih.'  (Imitates  barking
and  scratching  of  a  fox. )
Txi'nl'-xVkiru-iin'  (repeated  four  times),  />■?-)-.  (Imitates  the  cry  of  an  opossum when  cornered,  and  throws  his  head  back  as  that  animal  does  when  feigning  death,  i
16.   THE   RABBIT   GOES   DUCK   HUNTING
The  Rabbit  was  so  boastful  that  lie  would  claim  to  do  whatever  he
saw  anyone  else  do.  and  so  tricky  that  he  could  usually  make  the  other
animals  believe  it  all.  Once  he  pretended  that  he  could  swim  in  the
water  and  eat  fish  just  as  the  Otter  did.  and  when  the  others  told  him
to  prove  it  he  lixed  up  a  plan  so  that  the  Otter  himself  was  deceived.
Soon  afterward  they  met  again  and  the  Otter  said,  "I  eat  ducks  some-
times." Said  the  Rabbit,  "Well,  I  eat  ducks  too."  The  Otter  chal-
lenged him  to  try  it;  so  they  went  up  along  the  river  until  they  saw
several  ducks  in  the  water  and  managed  to  get  near  without  being
seen.  The  Rabbit  told  the  Otter  to  go  first.  The  Otter  never  hesi-
tated, but  dived  from  the  bank  and  swam  under  water  until  he  reached
the  ducks,  when  he  pulled  one  down  without  being  noticed  by  the
others,  and  came  back  in  the  same  way.
While  the  Otter  had  been  under  the  water  the  Rabbit  had  peeled


THE    BABBIT    GOES    DUCK     111  NTING  267
sonic  bark  from  a  sapling  and  made  himself  a  noose.  "  Now  ."  he  said,
"Just  watch  me:"' and  he  dived  in  and  swam  a  little  way  under  the
water  until  he  was  nearly  choking  and  had  to  come  up  to  the  top  to
breathe.  He  went  under  again  and  came  up  again  a  little  nearer  to
the  ducks.  He  look  another  breath  and  dived  under,  and  this  time  he
came  up  among  the  ducks  and  threw  the  noose  over  the  head  of  one
and  caught  it.  The  duck  struggled  hard  and  finally  spread  its  wings
and  flew  up  from  the  water  with  the  Rabbit  hanging  on  to  the  noose.
It  flew  on  and  on  until  at  last  the  Rabbil  could  not  hold  on  any
longer,  bul  had  i>-  let  go  and  drop.  As  it  happened,  he  fell  into  a  tall,
hollow  sycamore  stump  without  any  hole  at  the  bottom  to  gel  oul
from,  and  there  lie  stayed  until  he  was  so  hungry  that  lie  had  to  eat
his  own  fui-.  as  the  rabbil  does  ever  since  when  he  is  starving.  After
several  days,  when  he  was  very  weak  with  hunger,  he  heard  children
playing  outside  around  the  trees.     lie  began  to  sing:
Cm  a  door  and  l""k  at  me;
I'm  the  prettiest  thing  you  ever  did  aee.
The  children  ran  home  and  told  their  father,  who  came  and  began
to  cut  a  hole  in  the  tree.  As  lie  chopped  away  tin'  Rabbit  inside  kepi
singing,  "Cut  it  larger,  so  you  can  see  me  better;  I'm  so  pretty."  They made  the  hole  larger,  and  then  the  Rabbit  told  them  to  stand  hack  so
that  they  could  take  a  good  look  as  he  came  out.  They  stood  away
hack,  and  the  Rabbit  watched  his  chance  and  jumped  oul  and  got  away.
17.  HOW  THE  RABBIT  STOLE  THE  OTTER'S  COAT
The  animals  were  of  different  sizes  and  wore  coats  of  various  colors
and  patterns.  Some  wore  lone-  fur  and  others  wore  short.  Some  had
rings  on  their  tails,  and  some  had  no  tails  at  all.  Some  had  coat-  of
brown,  others  of  black  or  yellow.  They  were  always  disputing  aboul
their  good  looks,  so  at  last  they  agreed  to  hold  a  council  to  decide  who
had  the  finest  coat.
They  had  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  Otter,  w  ho  lived  SO  far  up  the
creek  that  he  seldom  came  down  to  visit  the  other  animals.  It  was  -aid
that  he  had  the  finest  coat  of  all.  but  no  one  knew  just  what  it  was  like.
because  it  was  a  lone-  time  since  anyone  had  seen  him.  They  did  not
even  know  exactly  where  he  lived — only  the  general  direction;  but
they  knew  he  would  come  to  the  council  when  the  word  gol  out.
Now  the  Rabbil  wanted  the  verdict  for  himself,  so  when  it  began  to
look  as  if  it  might  go  to  the  Otter  he  studied  up  apian  to  cheat  him  out
of  it.  He  asked  a  few  sly  questions  until  he  learned  what  trail  the
Otterwould  take  to  gel  to  the  council  place.  Then,  without  saying  any-
thing, he  went  on  ahead  and  after  four  days'  travel   he  met  the  Otter
and  knew  him  at    -e  by  hi-  beautiful  coal  of  -oft  dark-brown* fur.
The  Otter  wa-  glad  to  see  him  and  asked  him  where  he  was  eroingr.


268  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.ij
•■  ( )."  said  the  Rabbit,  "  the  animals  sent  me  to  bring  you  to  the  council;
because  you  live  so  far  away  they  were  afraid  you  mightn't  know  the
road.'"     The  Otter  thanked  him.  and  they  went  on  together. They  traveled  all  day  toward  the  council  ground,  and  at  night  the
Rabbit  selected  the  camping  place,  because  the  Otter  wasa  stranger
in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  cut  down  bushes  for  beds  and  fixed
everything  in  good  shape.  The  next  morning  they  started  on  again.
In  the  afternoon  the  Rabbit  began  to  pick  up  wood  and  bark  as  they
went  along  and  to  load  it  on  his  hack.  When  the  Otter  asked  what  this
was  for  the  Rabbit  said  it  was  that  they  might  be  warm  and  comfort-
able at  night.  After  a  while,  when  it  was  near  sunset,  they  stopped
and  made  their  camp.
When  supper  was  over  the  Rabbit gota  stick  and  shaved  it  down  to
a  paddle.     The  Otter  wondered  and  asked  again  what  that  was  for.
"I  have  good  dreams  when  I  sleep  with  a  paddle  under  my  head," said  the  Rabbit.
When  the  paddle  was  finished  the  Rabbit  began  to  cut  awa}'  the
bushes  so  as  to  make  a  clean  trail  down  to  the  river.  The  Otter  won-
dered more  and  more  and  wanted  to  know  what  this  meant.
Said  the  Rabbit.  "This place  is  called  Di'tatlaski'yi  [The  Place  Where
it  Rains  Fire].  Sometimes  it  rains  tire  here,  and  the  sky  looks  a  little
that  way  to-night.  You  go  to  sleep  and  1*11  sit  up  and  watch,  and  if
the  tire  does  come,  as  soon  as  you  hear  me  shout,  you  run  and  jump
into  the  river.  Better  hang  your  eoat  on  a  limb  over  there,  so  it  won't
get  burnt." The  Otter  did  as  he  was  told,  and  they  both  doubled  up  to  go  to  sleep,
but  the  Rabbit  kept  awake.  After  a  while  the  tire  burned  down  to  red
coals.  The  Rabbit  called,  but  the  Otter  was  fast  asleep  and  made  no
answer.  In  a  little  while  he  called  again,  but  the  Otter  never  stirred.
Then  the  Rabbit  Idled  the  paddle  with  hot. coals  and  threw  them  up  into
the  air  and  shouted,  "  It's  raining  tire!   It's  raining  tire!"
The  hot  coals  fell  all  around  the  Otter  and  he  jumped  up.  "To  the
water! "  cried  the  Rabbit,  and  the  Otter  ran  and  jumped  into  the  river, and  he  has  lived  in  the  water  ever  since.
The  Rabbit  took  the  Otter's  coat  and  put  it  on,  leaving  his  own
instead,  and  went  on  to  the  council.  All  the  animals  were  there,  even-
one  looking  out  for  the  Otter.  At  last  they  saw  him  in  the  distance,
and  they  said  one  to  the  other,  "The  Otter  is  coming!"  and  sent  one
of  the  small  animals  to  show  him  the  best  seat.  They  were  all  glad
to  see  him  and  went  up  in  turn  to  welcome  him.  but  the  Otter  kept
his  head  down,  with  one  paw  over  his  face.  They  wondered  that  he
was  so  bashful,  until  the  Rear  came  up  and  pulled  the  paw  away,  and
there  was  the  Rabbit  with  his  split  nose.  He  sprang  up  and  started  to
run,  when  the  Bear  struck  at  him  and  pulled  his  tail  off,  but  the  Rabbit
was  too  quick  for  them  and  got  away.


moonky]  HOW    THE    WILDCAT    CAUGHT    THE    GOBBLES  269
18.   WHY    THE    POSSUM'S    TAIL    IS    BARE
The  Possum  used  to  have  a  long,  bushy  tail,  and  was  so  proud  of  it
that  he  combed  it  oul  every  morning  and  sang  about  it  ai  the  dance.
until  tlic  Rabbit,  who  had  had  no  tail  since  the  Bear  pulled  it  out.
became  very  jealous  and  made  up  his  mind  to  play  the  Possum  a  i  rick.
There  was  to  be  a  great  council  and  a  dance  at  which  all  the  animals
were  to  he  present.      It  was  the  Rabbit's  business  to  send  out   the  news.
so  a-  he  was  passing  the  Possum's  place  he  stopped  to  ask  him  if  he
intended  to  lie  there.  The  Possum  said  he  Would  come  if  hi'  could
have  a  special  seat,  "because  I  have  such  a  handsome  tail  that  I  ought
to  sit  where  everybody  can  see  me."  The  Rabbit  promised  to  attend
to  it  and  to  send  some  one  besides  to  comb  and  dress  the  Possum's  tail
for  the  dance,  so  the  Possum  was  very  much  pleased  and  agreed  to
come.
Then  the  Rabbit  went  over  to  the  Cricket,  who  is  such  an  expert  haii-
cutter  that  the  Indians  call  him  the  barber,  and  told  him  to  e-,>  next
morning  and  dress  the  Possum's  tail  for  the  dance  that  night.  I  le  told
the  Cricket  just  what  to  do  and  then  went  on  about  some  other  mischief.
In  the  morning  the  Cricket  went  to  the  Possum's  house  ami  said  he
had  conic  to  gei  him  ready  for  the  dance.  So  the  Possum  stretched
himself  out  and  shut  his  eyes  while  the  Cricket  combed  out  his  tail  and
wrapped  a  red  string  around  it  to  keep  it  smooth  until  night.  Hut  all
this  time,  as  he  wound  the  string  around,  he  was  clipping  oil'  the  hair close  to  the  roots,  and  the  Possum  never  knew  it.
When  it  was  night  the  Possum  went  to  the  townhouse  where  the
dance  was  to  he  and  found  the  best  seat  ready  for  him.  just  as  the  Rab-
liit  had  promised.  When  his  turn  came  in  the  dance  he  loosened  the
string  from  his  tail  and  stepped  into  the  middle  of  the  floor.  The
drummers  began  to  drum  and  the  Possum  began  to  sine-.  "See  my
beautiful  tail."  Everybody  shouted  and  he  danced  around  the  circle
and  sane-  again,  •"See  what  a  fine  color  it  has."  They  shouted  again
and  he  danced  around  another  time,  singing,  "See  how  it  sweeps  the
ground."  The  animals  shouted  more  loudly  than  ever,  and  the  Possum
was  delighted.  He  danced  around  again  and  sang,  "See  how  tine  the
fur  is."  Then  everybody  laughed  so  long  that  the  Possum  wondered what  they  meant.  He  looked  around  the  circle  of  animals  and  they
were  all  laughing-  at  him.  Then  he  looked  down  at  his  beautiful  tail
and  saw  that  there  was  not  a  hair  left  upon  it.  hut  that  it  was  as  bare  as
the  tail  of  a  lizard.  He  was  so  much  astonished  and  ashamed  that  he
could  not  say  a  word,  but  rolled  over  helpless  on  the  gi'ound  and
grinned,  as  the  Possum  does  to  this  day  when  taken  by  surprise.
19.   HOW   THE   WILDCAT   CAUGHT  THE   GOBBLER
The  Wildcat  once  caught  the  Rabbit  and  was  about  to  kill  him.  when
the   Rabbit  begged  for  his  life,  saying:  "  I'm  so  -mall  I  would  make


270  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.i.i
only  a  mouthful  for  you.  but  it'  you  Let  me  .y-o  I'll  show  you  where  you
can  gel  a  whole  drove  of  Turkeys."'  So  the  Wildcat  let  him  up  and went  with  him  to  where  the  Turkeys  were.
When  they  came  near  the  place  the  Rabbit  said  to  the  Wildcat,
••  Now.  you  must  do  just  as  I  say.  Lie  down  as  it  you  were  dead  and
don't  move,  even  if  I  kick  you.  but  when  I  give  the  word  jump  up  and
catch  the  largest  one  there."  The  Wildcat  agreedand  stretched  out  as
if  dead,  while  tlie  Rabbit  gathered  some  rotten  wood  and  crumbled  it
over  his  eyes  and  nose  to  make  them  look  flyblown,  so  that  the  Turkeys
would  think  lie  had  been  dead  some  time.
Then  the  Rabbit  went  over  to  the  Turkeys  and  said,  in  a  sociable
way.  "Here,  I've  found  our  old  enemy,  the  Wildcat,  lying  dead  in  the
trail.  Let's  have  a  dance  over  him."  The  Turkeys  were  very  doubtful,
hut  finally  went  with  him  to  where  the  Wildcat  was  lying  in  the  road
as  if  dead.  Now,  the  Rabbit  had  a  good  voice  and  was  a  great  dance
leader,  so  he  said,  "I'll  lead  the  song  and  you  dance  around  him."
The  Turkeys  thought  that  line,  so  the  Rabbit  took  a  stick  to  beat  time
and  began  to  sing:  "  Gdl&gi'na  hem tyak',  Gdldgi'na  hasuyak!  (pick  out
the  Gobbler,  pick  out  the  Gobbler)."
••  Why  do  you  say  that?"  said  the  old  Turkey.  "  O,  that's  all  right,"
said  the  Rabbit,  "that's  just  the  way  he  does,  and  we  sing  about  it." He  started  the  song  again  and  the  Turkeys  began  to  dance  around  the
Wildcat.  When  they  had  gone  around  several  times  the  Rabbit  said,
"  Now  go  up  and  hit  him,  as  we  do  in  the  war  dance."  So  the  Turkeys,
thinking  the  Wildcat  surely  dead,  crowded  in  close  around  him  and
the  old  gobbler  kicked  him.  Then  the  Rabbit  drummed  hard  and  sang
his  loudest,  "Pick  out  the  Gobbler,  pick  out  the  Gobbler,"  and  the Wildcat  jumped  up  and  caught  the  Gobbler.
20.  HOW  THE  TERRAPIN  BEAT  THE  RABBIT
The  Rabbit  was  a  great  runner,  and  everybody  knew  it.  No  one
thought  the  Terrapin  anything  but  a  slow  traveler,  but  he  was  a  great
warrior  and  very  boastful,  and  the  two  were  always  disputing  about
their  speed.  At  last  they  agreed  to  decide  the  matter  by  a  race.
They  fixed  the  day  and  the  starting  place  and  arranged  to  run  across
four  mountain  ridges,  and  the  one  who  came  in  first  at  the  end  was  to
be  the  winner.
The  Rabbit  felt  so  sure  of  it  that  he  said  to  the  Terrapin,  "You
know  you  can't  run.  You  can  never  win  the  race,  so  I'll  give  you  the
first  ridge  and  then  you'll  have  only  three  to  cross  while  I  go  over
four." The  Terrapin  said  that  would  be  all  right,  but  that  night  wdien  he
went  home  to  his  family  he  sent  for  his  Terrapin  friends  and  told
them  he  wanted  their  help.  He  said  he  knew  he  could  not  outrun  the
Rabbit,  but  he  wanted  to  stop  the  Rabbit's  boasting.  He  explained
his  plan  to  his  friends  and  they  agreed  to  help  him.


moonei  HOW    THE    TEBRAPIH    BEAT    THE    BABBIT  '-'71
When  the  day  came  all  the  animals  were  there  to  see  the  race.  The
K;il>l)it  was  with  them.  but  the  Terrapin  was  gone  ahead  toward  the  first
ridge,  as  they  had  arranged,  and  thej  could  hardly  see  him  on  account
of  the  lone-  grass.  The  word  was  given  and  the  Rabbil  started  nil'  with
long  jumps  up  the  mountain,  expecting  I"  win  t  he  race  before  the  Ter-
rapin could  gel  down  the  other  side.  But  lie  fore  lie  got  u|i  the  moun-
tain he  saw  the  Terrapin  go  over  the  ridge  ahead  of  him.     He  ran  on.
and  when  he  reached  the  top  he  looked  all  around.  Imt  could  not  see
the  Terrapin  on  account  of  the  lone-  o-rass.  He  kept  on  down  the  moun
tain  and  began  to  climb  the  second  ridge,  hut  when  he  looked  up  again
there  was  the  Terrapin  just  going  over  the  top.  Now  he  was  surprised
and  made  his  longest  jumps  to  catch  up,  but  when  he  o-"t  to  the  top
there  was  the  Terrapin  away  in  trout  going  over  the  third  ridge.  The
Rabbil  was  getting  tired  now  and  nearly  out  of  breath,  hut  he  kept  on
down  the  mountain  and  up  the  other  ridge  until  he  got  to  the  top  just
in  time  to  see  the  Terrapin  cross  the  fourth  ridge  and  thus  win  the  race.
The  Rabbit  could  not  make  another  jump.  Imt  fell  over  on  the  ground,
crying  ml,  mi.  mi,  mi.  as  the  Rabbit  does  ever  since  when  he  is  too  tired
to  run  any  more.  The  race  was  given  to  the  Terrapin  and  all  the  ani-
mal- wondered  how  he  could  win  against  the  Rabbit,  hut  he  kept  still
and  never  told.  It  was  easy  enough,  however,  because  all  the  Terra
pin's  friends  looked  just  alike,  and  he  had  simply  posted  one  near  the
toji  of  each  ridge  to  wait  until  the  Rabbit  came  in  sight  and  then  climb
over  and  hide  in  the  long  grass.  When  the  Rabbit  came  on  he  could
not  find  the  Terrapin  and  so  thought  the  Terrapin  was  ahead,  and  if  he
had  met  one  of  the  other  terrapins  he  would  have  thought  it  the  same
one  because  they  looked.so  much  alike.  The  real  Terrapin  had  posted
himself  on  the  fourth  ridge,  so  as  to  come  in  at  the  end  of  the  race
and  be  ready  to  answer  questions  if  the  animals  suspected  anything.
Because  the  Rabbit  had  to  lie  down  and  lose  the  race  the  conjurer
now.  when  preparing  his  young  men  for  the  hall  play,  boils  a  lot  of
rabbit  hamstrings  into  a  soup,  and  sends  some  one  at  night  to  pour  it
across  the  path  along  which  the  other  players  are  to  come  in  the  morn-
ing, so  that  they  may  become  tired  in  the  same  way  and  lose  the  game.
It  is  not  always  easy  to  do  this,  because  the  other  party  is  expecting
it  and  has  watchers  ahead  to  prevent  it.
21.  THE   RABBIT  AND  THE  TAR  WOLF
Once  there  was  such  a  lone'  spell  of  dry  weather  that  there  was  no
more  water  in  the  creeks  and  springs,  and  the  animals  held  a  council
to  see  what  to  do  about  it.  They  decided  to  die-  ;,  well,  and  all  agreed
to  help  except  the  Rabbit,  who  was  a  lazy  fellow,  and  said.  "  I  don't
need  to  dig  for  water.  The  dew  on  the  grass  is  enough  for  me."  The others  did  not  like  this,  hut  they  went  to  work  together  and  dug
their  well.


272  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
They  noticed  that  the  Rabbit  kepi  sleek  and  lively,  although  it  was
still  dry  weather  and  the  water  was  getting  low  in  the  well.  They  said.
"That  tricky  Rabbit  steals  our  water  at  night,"  so  they  made  a  wolf
of  pine  gum  and  tar  and  set  it  up  by  the  well  to  scar  •  the  thief.  That
night  the  Rabbit  came,  as  he  had  been  coming  every  night,  to  drink
enough  to  last  him  all  next  day.  He  saw  the  queer  black  thing  by  the
well  and  said.  "Who's  there?"  but  the  tar  wolf  said  nothing.  He
came  nearer,  but  the  wolf  never  moved,  so  he  grew  braver  and  said,
"Get  out  of  my  way  or  I'll  strike  you."  Still  the  wolf  never  moved and  the  Rabbit  came  up  and  struck  it  with  his  paw,  but  the  gum  held
his  foot  and  it  stuck  fast.  Now  he  was  angry  and  said,  "Let  mo
go  or  I'll  kick  you."  Still  the  wolf  said  nothing.  Then  the  Rabbit struck  again  with  his  hind  foot,  so  hard  that  it  was  caught  in  the  gum
and  he  could  not  move,  and  there  he  stuck  until  the  animals  came  for
water  in  the  morning.  When  they  found  who  the  thief  was  they  had
great  sport  over  him  for  a  while  and  then  got  ready  to  kill  him,  but  as
soon  as  he  was  unfastened  from  the  tar  wolf  he  managed  to  get
away. — Wafford,
SECOND    VEKSION
"Once  upon  a  time  there  was  such  a  severe  drought  that  all  streams
of  water  and  all  lakes  were  dried  up.  In  this  emergency  the  beasts
assembled  together  to  devise  means  to  procure  water.  It  was  pro-
posed by  one  to  dig  a  well.  All  agreed  to  do  so  except  the  hare.  She
refused  because  it  would  soil  her  tiny  paws.  The  rest,  however,  dug
their  well  and  were  fortunate  enough  to  find  water.  The  hare  begin-
ning to  sutler  and  thirst,  and  having  no  right  to  the  well,  was  thrown
upon  her  wits  to  procure  water.  She  determined,  as  the  easiest  way.
to  steal  from  the  public  well.  The  rest  of  the  animals,  surprised  to
find  that  the  hare  was  so  well  supplied  with  water,  asked  her  where
she  got  it.  She  replied  that  she  arose  betimes  in  the  morning  and
gathered  the  dewdrops.  However  the  wolf  and  the  fox  suspected  her
of  theft  and  hit  on  the  following  plan  to  detect  her:
They  made  a  wolf  of  tar  and  placed  it  near  the  well.  On  the  fol-
lowing night  the  hare  came  as  usual  after  her  supply  of  water.  On
seeing  the  tar  wolf  she  demanded  who  was  there.  Receiving  no  answer
she  repeated  the  demand,  threatening  to  kick  the  wolf  if  he  did  not
reply.  She  receiving  no  reply  kicked  the  wolf,  and  by  this  means
adhered  to  the  tar  and  was  caught.  When  the  fox  and  wolf  got  hold
of  her  they  consulted  what  it  was  best  to  do  with  her.  One  proposed
cutting  her  head  off.  This  the  hare  protested  would  be  useless,  as  it
had  often  been  tried  without  hurting  her.  Other  methods  were  pro-
posed for  dispatching  her,  all  of  which  she  said  would  be  useless.  At
last  it  was  proposed  to  let  her  loose  to  perish  in  a  thicket.  Upon  this
the  hare  affected  great  uneasiness  and  pleaded  hard  for  life.     Her


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH   ANNUAL  REPORT     PL.   XIV
-.hot  £RAF




hooney]  THE    RABBIT    DINKS    THE    BEAR  -J".'?
enemies,  however,  refused  to  listen  and  she  was  accordingly  let  loose.
As  soon,  however,  as  she  was  out  <>l'  reach  of  her  enemies  she  ga\  e  a
whoop,  and  bounding  away  she  exclaimed:  'This  is  where  I  live."' Cherokee  Advocate.  December  is.  L845.
22.  THE  RABBIT  AND  THE  POSSUM  AFTER  A  WIFE
The  Rabbit  and  the  Possum  each  wanted  a  wife,  but  no  one  would
marry  eitherof  them.  They  talked  overthe  matter  and  the  Rabbit  said.
"Wecan't  get  wives  here;  let's  go  to  the  next  settlement.  I'm  the
messenger  for  the  council,  and  I'll  tell  the  people  that  1  brine-  an  order
that  everybody  must  take1  a  mate  at  once,  and  then  we'll  be  sure  to  get
our  wives."
The  Possum  thought  this  a  tine  plan,  so  they  started  oil  together  to
the  next  town.  As  tin1  Rabbit  traveled  faster  he  got  there  first  and
waited  outside  until  the  people  noticed  him  and  took  him  into  the
townhouse.  When  the  chief  came  to  ask  his  business  the  Rabbit  said
he  brought  an  important  order  from  the  council  that  everybody  must
get  married  without  delay.  So  the  chief  called  the  people  together
and  told  them  the  message  from  the  council.  Every  animal  took  a
mate  at  once,  and  the  Rabbit  got  a  wife.
The  Possum  traveled  so  slowly  that  he  got  there  after  all  the  animals
had  mated,  leaving  him  still  without  a  wife.  The  Rabbit  pretended  to
feel  sorry  for  him  and  said.  "Never  mind.  I'll  carry  the  message  to
the  people  in  the  next  settlement,  and  you  hurry  on  as  fast  as  you  can,
and  this  time  you  will  get  your  wife." So  he  went  on  to  the  next  town,  and  the  Possum  followed  close  after
him.  But  when  the  Rabbit  got  to  the  townhouse  he  sent  out  the  word
that,  as  there  had  been  peace  so  long  that  everybody  was  getting  lazy
the  council  had  ordered  that  there  must  be  war  at  once  and  they  must
begin  right  in  the  townhouse.  So  they  all  began  fighting,  but  the
Rabbit  made  four  great  leaps  and  got  away  just  as  the  Possum  came
in.  Everybody  jumped  on  the  Possum,  who  had  not  thought  of  bring-
ing his  weapons  on  a  wedding  trip,  and  so  could  not  defend  himself.
They  had  nearly  beaten  the  life  out  of  him  when  he  fell  over  and  pre-
tended to  be  dead  until  lie  saw  a  good  chance  to  jump  up  and  get  away.
The  Possum  never  got  a  wife,  but  he  remembers  the  lesson,  and  ever
since  he  shuts  his  eyes  and  pretends  to  be  dead  when  the  hunter  has
him  in  a  close  corner.
23.   THE   RABBIT  DINES   THE  BEAR
The  Rear  'united  the  Rabbit  to  dine  with  him.  They  had  beans  in
the  pot.  but  there  was  no  grease  for  them,  so  the  Bear  cut  a  slit  in  his
side  and  let  the  oil  run  out  until  they  had  enough  to  cook  the  dinner.
The  Rabbit  looked  surprised,  and  thought  to  himself.  ••That's  a  handy
l'.t    ETII— 01   18


274  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.AHN.ly
way.     I  think  I'll  try  that."     When  he  started  home  he  invited  the Bear  to  come  and  take  dinner  with  him  four  days  later.
When  the  Bear  came  the  Babbit  .said,  "  I  have  beans  for  dinner,  too.
Now  I'll  yet  the  grease  for  them."  So  he  took  a  knife  and  drove  it  into his  side,  but  instead  of  oil,  a  stream  of  blood  gushed  out  and  he  fell
over  nearly  dead.  The  Bear  picked  him  up  and  had  hard  work  to  tie
up  the  wound  and  stop  the  bleeding.  Then  he  scolded  him,  "You
little  fool,  I'm  large  and  strong  and  lined  with  fat  all  over;  the  knife
don't  hurt  me;  but  you're  small  and  lean,  and  you  can't  do  such
things." 24.  THE   RABBIT  ESCAPES   FROM   THE  WOLVES
Some  Wolves  once  caught  the  Rabbit  and  were  going  to  eat  him
when  he  asked  leave  to  show  them  a  new  dance  he  was  practicing.
They  knew  that  the  Rabbit  was  a  great  song  leader,  and  they  wanted  to
learn  the  latest  dance,  so  they  agreed  and  made  a  ring  about  him
while  he  got  ready.  He  patted  his  feet  and  began  to  dance  around  in
a  circle,  singing:
Tldge'sili'in'  iinli'xiii'xkhi'hS. — Ha' unt  lil!  Hi:  Ha/nia  I; I.'  til!
On  tin-  edge  of  the  field  I  dance  about —
Ha'nialfl!  111!  Ha'nia  111!  HI!
"Now,"  said  the  Rabbit,  "when  I  sing  'on  the  edge  of  the  field,'  I
dance  that  way" — and  he  danced  over  in  that  direction — "and  when  I
sing  7;/ .'///.'"  you  must  all  stamp  your  feet  hard."  The  Wolves  thought it  fine.  He  began  another  round  singing  the  same  song,  and  danced
a  little  nearer  to  the  field,  while  the  Wolves  all  stamped  their  feet,
lie  sang  louder  and  louder  and  danced  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  field
until  at  the  fourth  song,  when  the  Wolves  were  stamping  as  hard  as
they  could  and  thinking  only  of  the  song,  he  made  one  jump  and
was  off  through  the  long  grass.  They  were  after  him  at  once,  but  he
ran  for  a  hollow  stump  and  climbed  up  on  the  inside.  When  the
the  Wolves  got  there  one  of  them  put  his  head  inside  to  look  up,  but
the  Rabbit  spit  into  his  eye,  so  that  he  had  to  pull  his  head  out  again.
The  others  were  afraid  to  try,  and  they  went  away,  with  the  Rabbit
still  in  the  stump.
25.   FLINT  VISITS  THE  RABBIT
In  the  old  days  Tawi'skala  (Flint)  lived  up  in  the  mountains,  and  all
the  animals  hated  him  because  he  had  helped  to  kill  so  many  of  them.
They  used  to  get  together  to  talk  over  means  to  put  him  out  of  the
way,  but  everybody  was  afraid  to  venture  near  his  house  until  the
Rabbit,  who  was  the  boldest  leader  among  them,  offered  to  go  after
Flint  and  try  to  kill  him.  They  told  him  where  to  find  him,  and  the
Rabbit  set  out  and  at  last  came  to  Flint's  house.


FLINT    VISITS    THE    BABBIT  275
Flint  was  standing  at  his  door  when  the  Rabbit  came  up  and  said,
sneeringly,  "Siyu'f  Hello!  Arc  you  the  fellow  they  call  Flint?"
"Yes;  that's  what  they  call  me,"  answered  Flint.  "  Is  this  where  you
live?"  "Yes;  this  iswhere  I  live."  All  this  time  the  Rabbit  was
looking  about  the  place  trying  to  study  out  some  plan  t<>  take  Flint  off
hi-  guard,  lie  bad  expected  Flint  to  invite  him  into  the  house,  so  he
waited  a  Little  while  hut  when  Flint  made  no  move,  he  said,  •■Well.
my  name  is  Rabbit;  I've  heard  a  good  deal  about  you.  so  I  came  to
iu\  ite  you  to  come  ami  see  ine."
Flint  wanted  to  know  where  the  Rabbit's  house  was.  ami  he  told  him
it  was  down  in  the  broom-grass  field  near  the  river.  So  Flintpromised
to  make  him  a  visit  in  a  few  days.  "Why  not  come  now  and  have
supperwith  me?"  said  the  Rabbit,  and  after  a  little  coaxing  Flint
agreed  and  the  two  started  down  the  mountain  together.
When  they  came  near  the  Rabbit's  hole  the  Rabbit  said.  ••There  is
my  house,  hut  in  summer  I  generally  stay  outside  here  where  it  is
cooler.'"  So  he  made  a  fire,  and  they  had  their  supper  on  the  grass. When  it  was  over,  Flint  stretched  out  to  rest  and  the  Rabbit  got  some
heavy  sticks  and  his  knife  and  cut  out  a  mallet  and  wedge.  Flint
looked  up  and  asked  what  that  was  for.  '"Oh,"  said  the  Rabhit.  "I
like  to  be  doing  something,  and  they  may  come  handy."  So  Flint  lay
down  again,  and  pretty  soon  he  was  sound  asleep.  The  Rabbit  spoke
to  him  once  or  twice  to  make  sure,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Then  he
came  over  to  Flint  and  with  one  good  blow  of  the  mallet  he  drove  the
sharp  -take  into  his  body  and  ran  with  all  his  might  for  his  own  hole;
but  before  he  reached  it  there  was  a  loud  explosion,  and  pieces  of  flint
flew  all  about.  That  is  why  we  find  flint  in  so  many  places  now.  One
piece  struck  the  Rabbit  from  behind  and  cut  him  just  as  he  dived  into
his  hole.  He  sat  listening  until  everything  seemed  quiet  again.  Then
he  put  his  head  out  to  look  around,  but  just  at  that  moment  another
piece  fell  and  struck  him  on  the  lip  and  split  it.  as  we  -till  see  it.
26.   HOW    THE    DEER    GOT    HIS    HORNS
In  the  beginning  the  Deer  had  no  horns,  but  his  head  was  smooth
just  like  a  doe'-.  He  was  a  great  runner  and  the  Rabbit  was  a  great jumper,  and  the  animals  were  all  curious  to  know  which  could  go
farther  in  the  same  time.  They  talked  about  it  a  good  deal,  and  at
last  arranged  a  match  between  the  two.  and  made  a  nice  large  pair  of
antlers  for  a  prize  to  the  winner.  They  were  to  start  together  from
one  side  of  a  thicket  and  go  through  it,  then  turn  and  come  back,  and
tin-  one  who  came  out  first  was  to  get  the  horns.
On  the  day  fixed  all  the  animals  were  there,  with  the  antlers  put
down  on  the  ground  at  the  edge  of  the  thicket  to  mark  the  starting
point.  While  everybody  was  admiring  the  horns  the  Rabbit  said:  "  I
don't  know  this  part  of  the  country;   I  want  to  take  a  look  through


27<)  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  bushes  where  I  am  to  run."  They  thought  that  all  right,  so  the Rabbit  went  into  the  thicket,  but  he  was  gone  so  long  that  at  last  the
animals  suspected  he  must  he  up  to  one  of  his  tricks.  They  sent  a
messenger  to  look  for  him,  and  away  in  the  middle  of  the  thicket  he
found  the  Rabbit  gnawing  down  the  hushes  and  pulling  them  away
until  he  had  a  road  cleared  nearly  to  the  other  side.
The  messenger  turned  around  quietly  and  came  back  and  told  the
other  animals.  When  the  Rabbit  came  out  at  last  they  accused  him  of
cheating,  but  he  denied  it  until  they  went  into  the  thicket  and  found
the  cleared  road.  They  agreed  that  such  a  trickster  had  no  right  to
enter  the  race  at  all,  so  they  gave  the  horns  to  the  Deer,  who  was
admitted  to  be  the  best  runner,  and  he  has  worn  them  ever  since.
They  told  the  Rabbit  that  as  he  was  so  fond  of  cutting  down  bushes  he
might  do  that  for  a  living  hereafter,  and  so  he  does  to  this  day.
27.  WHY  THE   DEER'S  TEETH   ARE  BLUNT
The  Rabbit  felt  sore  because  the  Deer  had  won  the  horns  (see  the
last  story),  and  resolved  to  get  even.  One  day  soon  after  the  race  he
stretched  a  large  grapevine  across  the  trail  and  gnawed  it  nearly  in
two  in  the  middle.  Then  he  went  back  a  piece,  took  a  good  run.  and
jumped  up  at  the  vine.  He  kept  on  running  and  jumping  up  at  the
vine  until  the  Deer  came  along  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing?
"Don't  you  see?"  says  the  Rabbit.  "I'm  so  strong  that  I  can  bite
through  that  grapevine  at  one  jump." The  Deer  could  hardly  believe  this,  and  wanted  to  see  it  done.  So
the  Rabbit  ran  back,  made  a  tremendous  spring,  and  bit  through  the
vim1  where  he  had  gnawed  it  before.  The  Deer,  when  he  saw  that,
said.  "  Well,  I  can  do  it  if  you  can."  So  the  Rabbit  stretched  a  larger
grapevine  across  the  trail,  but  without  gnawing  it  in  the  middle.  The
Deer  ran  back  as  he  had  seen  the  Rabbit  do,  made  a  spring,  and  struck
the  grapevine  right  in  the  center,  but  it  only  flew  back  and  threw  him
over  on  his  head.  He  tried  again  and  again,  until  he  was  all  bruised
and  bleeding.
"Let  me  see  your  teeth,"  at  last  said  the  Rabbit.  So  the  Deer
show cd  him  his  teeth,  which  were  long  like  a  wolf's  teeth,  but  not  very sharp.
"No  wonder  you  can't  do  it,"  says  the  Rabbit;  "your  teeth  are  too
blunt  to  bite  anything.  Let  me  sharpen  them  for  3-011  like  mine.  My
teeth  are  so  sharp  that  I  can  cut  through  a  stick  just  like  a  knife."
And  he  showed  him  a  black  locust  twig,  of  which  rabbits  gnaw  the
young  shoots,  which  he  had  shaved  off  as  well  as  a  knife  could  do  it,
in  regular  rabbit  fashion.  The  Deer  thought  that  just  the  thing.
So  the  Rabbit  got  a  hard  stone  with  rough  edges  and  filed  and  filed
away  at  the  Deer's  teeth  until  they  were  worn  down  almost  to  the  gums.


FATE    OF    THE    RABBIT  "-'77
•■  It  hurts,"  said  the  Deer;  but  the  Rabbit  said  ii  always  hurt  a  little
when  they  began  to  get  sharp;  so  the  Deer  kept  quiet.
••  Now  try  it."  at  last  said  the  Rabbit.  So  the  Deer  tried  again, but  this  time  he  could  not  bite  at  all.
••  Now  you've  paid  for  your  horns,"  said  the  Rabbit,  as  he  jumped
away  through  the  bushes.  Ever  since  then  the  Deer's  teeth  arc  so
blunt  that  he  can  not  chew  anything  but  grass  and  leave-.
28.   WHAT   BECAME   OF    THE    RABBIT
The  Deer  was  very  angry  at  the  Rabbit  for  filing  his  teeth  and  deter-
mined to  lie  revenged,  hut  he  kept  still  and  pretended  to  be  friendly  until
the  Rabbit  was  oti  his  guard.  Then  one  day.  as  they  were  going  along
together  talking,  he  challenged  the  Rabbit  to  jump  against  him.  Now
the  Rabbit  is  a  great  juniper,  as  every  one  knows,  so  he  agreed  at  once.
There  was  a  small  stream  beside  the  path,  as  there  generally  is  in  that
country,  and  the  Deer  said:
"Let's  see  if  you  can  jump  across  this  branch.  We'll  go  hack  a
piece,  and  then  when  I  say  h'1'1.'  then  both  run  and  jump."
•'  All  right."  said  the  Rabbit.  So  they  went  hack  to  get  a  good  -tart.
and  when  the  Deer  gave  the  word  Kfi .'  they  ran  tor  the  stream,  and
the  Rabbit  made  one  jump  and  landed  on  the  other  side.  But  the  Deer
had  stopped  on  the  bank,  and  when  the  Rabbit  looked  hack  the  Deer
had  eonjured  the  stream  so  that  it  was  a  large  river.  The  Rabbil  was
never  able  to  get  hack  again  and  is  still  on  the  other  side.  The  rabbit
that  we  know  is  only  a  little  thing  that  came  afterwards.
29.   WHY   THE   MINK   SMELLS
The  Mink  was  such  a  great  thief  that  at  last  the  animals  held  a  coun-
cil about  the  matter.  It  was  decided  to  burn  him.  so  they  caught  the
Mink,  built  a  great  tire,  and  threw  him  into  it.  As  the  blaze  went  up
and  they  smelt  the  roasted  flesh,  they  began  to  think  he  was  punished
enough  and  would  probably  do  better  in  the  future,  so  they  took  him
out  of  the  tire.  But  the  Mink  was  already  burned  black  and  is  black
ever  since,  and  whenever  he  is  attacked  or  excited  lie  smells  again  like
roasted  meat.  The  lesson  did  no  good,  however,  and  he  is  still  a-  great
a  thief  a-  ever.
30.  WHY  THE   MOLE   LIVES   UNDERGROUND
A  man  was  in  love  with  a  woman  who  disliked  him  and  would  have
nothing  to  do  with  him.  He  tried  every  way  to  win  her  favor,  hut  to
no  purpose,  until  at  last  lie  grew  discouraged  and  made  himself  sick
thinking  over  it.  The  Mole  came  along,  and  finding  him  in  such  low
condition  asked  what  was  the  trouble.  The  man  told  him  the  whole
story,  and  when  he  had  finished  the  Mole  said:  "I  can  help  you,  so
that  -lie  will  not  only  like  you,  but  will  come  to  VOU  of  her  own  will."


278  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ahs.19
So  that  night  the  Mole  burrowed  his  way  underground  to  where  the
girl  was  in  bed  asleep  and  took  out  her  heart.  He  came  hack  by  the
same  way  and  gave  the  heart  to  the  man,  who  could  not  see  it  even
when  it  was  put  into  his  hand.  ''There,"  said  the  Mole,  "swallow  it,
and  she  will  be  drawn  to  come  to  you  and  can  not  keep  away."  The
man  swallowed  the  heart,  and  when  the  girl  woke  up  she  somehow
thought  at  once  of  him,  and  felt  a  strange  desire  to  be  with  him,  as
though  she  must  go  to  him  at  once.  She  wondered  and  could  not
understand  it.  because  she  had  always  disliked  him  before,  but  at  last
the  feeling  grew  so  strong  that  she  was  compelled  to  go  herself  to  the
man  and  tell  him  she  loved  him  and  wanted  to  be  his  wife.  And  so
they  were  married,  but  all  the  magicians  who  had  known  them  both
were  surprised  and  wondered  how  it  had  come  about.  When  they
found  that  it  was  the  work  of  the  Mole,  whom  they  had  always  before
thought  too  insignificant  for  their  notice,  they  were  very  jealous  and
threatened  to  kill  him,  so  that  he  hid  himself  under  the  ground  and
has  never  since  dared  to  come  up  to  the  surface.
31.   THE   TERRAPIN'S   ESCAPE   FROM   THE  WOLVES
The  Possum  and  the  Terrapin  went  out  together  to  hunt  persim-
mons, and  found  a  tree  full  of  ripe  fruit.  The  Possum  climbed  it  and
was  throwing  down  the  persimmons  to  the  Terrapin  when  a  wolf  came
up  and  began  to  snap  at  the  persimmons  as  they  fell,  before  the  Ter-
rapin could  reach  them.  The  Possum  waited  his  chance,  and  at  last
managed  to  throw  down  a  large  one  (some  say  a  bone  which  he  carried
with  him),  so  that  it  lodged  in  the  wolfs  throat  as  he  jumped  up  at  it
and  choked  him  to  death.  "  I'll  take  his  ears  for  hominy  spoons,"  -aid
the  Terrapin,  and  cut  off  the  wolf's  ears  and  started  home  with  them,
leaving  the  Possum  still  eating  persimmons  up  in  the  tree.  After
a  while  he  came  to  a  house  and  was  invited  to  have  some  kanahdna
gruel  from  the  jar  that  is  set  always  outside  the  door.  He  sat  down
beside  the  jar  and  dipped  up  the  gruel  with  one  of  the  wolf's  ears  for
a  spoon.  The  people  noticed  and  wondered.  When  he  was  satisfied
he  went  on,  but  soon  came  to  another  house  and  was  asked  to  have
some  more  kanahe'na.  He  dipped  it  up  again  with  the  wolf's  ear  and went  on  when  he  had  enough.  Soon  the  news  went  around  that  the
Terrapin  had  killed  the  Wolf  and  was  using  his  ears  for  spoons.  All
the  Wolves  got  together  and  followed  the  Terrapin's  trail  until  they came  up  with  him  and  made  him  prisoner.  Then  they  held  a  council
to  decide  what  to  do  with  him,  and  agreed  to  boil  him  in  a  clay  pot.
They  brought  in  a  pot,  but  the  Terrapin  only  laughed  at  it  and  said
that  if  they  put  him  into  that  thing  he  would  kick  it  all  to  pieces.
They  said  they  would  burn  him  in  the  fire,  but  the  Terrapin  laughed
again  and  said  he  would  put  it  out.  Then  they  decided  to  throw  him
into  the  deepest  hole  in  the  river  and  drown  him.     The  Terrapin


mooney]  OBIGUN    OE    THE    GBOUNDHOG    DANCE  279
begged  and  prayed  them  not  to  do  that,  but  they  paid  no  attention,  and
dragged  him  over  to  the  river  and  threw  him  in.  Thai  was  jus!  what
the  Terrapin  had  been  waiting  for  all  the  time,  and  he  dived  under  the
water  and  came  up  on  the  other  side  and  got  away.
Some  >a\  thai  when  he  was  thrown  into  the  river  he  struck  againsl
a  rock,  which  broke  his  hack  in  a  dozen  places.  He  sang  a  medicine
-one':
I  il'l'ifllij,   '  iri),     I  ill', I, III,  '  II  l'l,
I  have  sewed  myself  together,  I  have  sewed  myself  together,
and  the  pieces  came  toe-ether,  hut  the  scars  remain  on  his  shell  to  this day.
32.  ORIGIN  OF  THE  GROUNDHOG  DANCE:  THE  GROUNDHOGS
HEAD
Seven  wolves  once  caught  a  Groundhog  and  said.  "Now  we'll  kill
you  ami  have  something  good  to  cat."  But  the  Groundhog-  said.
••  When  we  find  good  food  we  must  rejoice  over  it,  as  people  do  in  the
Green-corn  dance.  I  know  you  mean  to  kill  me  and  I  can't  help  my-
self, but  if  you  want  to  dance  I'll  sing  for  you.  This  is  a  new  dance
entirely.  I'll  lean  up  against  seven  trees  in  turn  and  you  will  dance
out  and  then  turn  and  come  back,  as  T  give  the  signal,  and  at  the  last
turn  you  may  kill  me.'' The  wolves  were  very  hungry,  but  they  wanted  to  learn  the  new
dance,  so  they  told  him  to  go  ahead.  The  Groundhog  leaned  up  against
a  tree  and  began  the  song.  //</' ' u-iij, ',  In' .  and  all  the  wolves  danced  out
in  front,  until  he  gave  the  signal,  Yu!  and  began  with  ///';/, i,/u'„;\
when  they  turned  and  danced  back  in  line.  •'That's  tine,"  said  the
Groundhog,  and  went  over  to  the  next  tree  and  started  thesecond  song.
The  wolves  danced  out  and  then  turned  at  the  signal  and  danced
hack  again.  "''Unit's  very  tine,"'  said  the  Groundhog,  and  went  over to  another  tree  and  started  the  third  song.  The  wolves  danced  their
lust  and  the  Groundhog  encouraged  them,  but  at  each  song  he  took
another  tree,  and  each  tree  was  a  little  nearer  to  his  hole  under  a  stump.
At  the  seventh  song  he  said.  "Now,  this  is  the  last  dance,  and  when  I
say  Yu.'  you  will  all  turn  and  come  after  me,  and  the  one  who  gets  me
may  have  me."  So  he  began  the  seventh  song  and  kept  it  up  until
the  wolves  were  away  out  in  front.  Then  he  gave  the  signal,  Yu!  and
made  a  jump  for  his  hole.  The  wolves  turned  and  were  after  him.  but
he  reached  the  hole  first  and  dived  in.  Just  as  he  got  inside,  the  fore-
most wolf  caught  him  by  the  tail  and  gave  it  such  a  pull  that  it  broke
nil.  and  the  Groundhog's  tail  ha-  been  short  ever  since. *******
The  unpleasant  smell  of  the  Groundhog's  head  was  given  it  U\  the
other  animals  to  punish  an   insulting  remark   made  by  him  in  council.
The   story   is   a   vulgar  one.    without    wit   enough    to    make    it    worth
recording.


280  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ahn.19
33.   THE   MIGRATION    OF   THE   ANIMALS
In  the  old  times  when  the  animals  used  to  talk  and  hold  councils,
and  the  Grubworm  and  Woodchuck  used  to  marry  people,  there  was
once  a  great  famine  of  mast  in  the  mountains,  and  all  the  animals  and
birds  which  lived  upon  it  met  together  and  sent  the  Pigeon  out  to
the  low  country  to  see  if  any  food  could  be  found  there.  After  a
time  she  came  back  and  reported  that  she  had  found  a  country  where
the  mast  was  "up  to  our  ankles"  on  the  ground.  So  they  got together  and  moved  down  into  the  low  country  in  a  great  army.
34.  THE  WOLF'S  REVENGE— THE  WOLF  AND  THE  DOG
Kana'ti  had  wolves  to  hunt  for  him,  because  they  are  good  hunters and  never  fail.  He  once  sent  out  two  wolves  at  once.  One  went  to
the  cast  and  did  not  return.  The  other  went  to  the  north,  and  when
he  returned  at  night  and  did  not  find  his  fellow  he  knew  he  must  be
in  trouble  and  started  after  him.  After  traveling  on  some  time
he  found  his  brother  lying  nearly  dead  beside  a  great  greensnake
(sdMkw&'yi)  which  had  attacked  him.  The  snake  itself  was  too  badly
wounded  to  crawl  away,  and  the  angry  wolf,  who  had  magic  powers,
taking  out  several  hairs  from  his  own  whiskers,  shot  them  into  the
body  of  the  snake  and  killed  it.  He  then  hurried  back  to  Kana'ti,
who  sent  the  Terrapin  after  a  great  doctor  who  lived  in  the  west  to
save  the  wounded  wolf.  The  wolf  went  back  to  help  his  brother  and
by  his  magic  powers  he  had  him  cured  long  before  the  doctor  came
from  the  west,  because  the  Terrapin  was  such  a  slow  traveler  and  the
doctor  had  to  prepare  his  roots  before  he  started. *  *  *  *  *  *  *
In  the  beginning,  the  people  say,  the  Dog  was  put  on  the  mountain
and  the  Wolf  beside  the  fire.  When  the  winter  came  the  Dog  could
not  stand  the  cold,  so  he  came  down  to  the  settlement  and  drove  the
Wolf  from  the  fire.  The  Wolf  ran  to  the  mountains,  where  it  suited
him  so  well  that  he  prospered  and  increased,  until  after  a  while  he
ventured  down  again  and  killed  some  animals  in  the  settlements.  The
people  got  together  and  followed  and  killed  him,  but  his  brothers
came  from  the  mountains  and  took  such  revenge  that  ever  since  the
people  have  been  afraid  to  hurt  a  wolf.
Bird  Myths
35.  the  bird  tribes
Winged  creatures  of  all  kinds  arc  classed  under  the  generic  term  of
anind' hiUdd1 hA  (flyers).  Birds  are  called,  alike  in  the  singular  and
plural,  tsi'shwa,  the  term  being  generally  held  to  exclude  the  domestic
fowls  introduced  by  the  whites.  When  it  is  necessary  to  make  the
distinction  they  are  mentioned,  respectively,  as  in&gehA  (living  in  the


mooney]  THE    EAGLE  281
woods),  and  uhtnm'ta  (tame).  The  robin  is  called  tsiskwa'gwd,  a  name
which  ran  nut  be  analyzed,  while  the  little  sparrow  is  called  tsishod'yd
(the  real  or  principal  bird),  perhaps,  in  accord  with  a  principle  in
Indian  nomenclature,  on  accou.nl  of  its  wide  distribution.  .V-  in  other
languages,  many  of  the  bird  names  are  onomatopes,  as  10a  huhv!  (the
screech  owl),  u'guku'  (the  booting  owl),  wagvll'  (the  whippoorwill),
Mgil  (the  crow),  gUgtoS'  (the  quail),  huhu  (the  yellow  mocking  bird),
tsi' k, !',!,'  (the  chickadee),  salsa!  (the  goose).  The  turtledove  is  called
gid&'-diskanihl'  (it  cries  for  acorns),  on  account  of  the  resemblance  of
its  cry  to  the  sound  id'  the  word  for  acorn  [guW).  'Idle  meadow  lark
IS  called  tldhaisi'  (star),  on  account  of  the  appearance  of  its  tail  when
spread  out  as  it  soars.  The  nuthatch  (Sitta  carolvnensis)  is  called
tsuliefna  (deaf),  and  is  supposed  to  be  without  hearing,  possibly  on
account  of  its  fearless  disregard  for  man's  presence.  Certain  diseases
are  diagnosed  by  the  doctors  as  due  to  birds,  either  revengeful  bird
ghosts,  bird  feathers  about  the  house,  or  bird  shadows  falling  upon  the
patient  from  overhead.
The  eagle  (cwd'hUi)  is  the  great  sacred  bird  of  the  Cherokee,  a-  of
nearly  all  our  native  tribes,  ami  figures  prominently  in  their  ceremo-
nial ritual,  especially  in  all  things  relating  to  war.  The  particular
species  prized  was  the  golden  or  war  eagle  (Aquila  chryscetus),  called
by  the  Cherokee  the  "pretty-feathered  eagle."  on  account  of  its  beau tiful  tail  feathers,  white,  tipped  with  black,  which  were  in  such  great
demand  for  decorative  and  ceremonial  purposes  that  among  the  west
ern  tribes  a  single  tail  was  often  rated  as  equal  in  value  to  a  horse.
Among  the  Cherokee  in  the  old  times  the  killing  of  an  eagle  was  an  e\  cut
which  concerned  the  whole  settlement,  and  could  be  undertaken  only
by  the  professional  eagle  killer,  regularly  chosen  for  the  purpose  on
account  of  his  knowledge  of  the  prescribed  forms  and  the  prayers  to
be  said  afterwards  in  order  to  obtain  pardon  for  the  necessary  sacrilege,
and  thus  ward  off  vengeance  from  the  tribe.  It  is  told  of  one  man  upon
the  reservation  that  having  deliberately  killed  an  eagle  in  defiance  of
the  ordinances  he  was  constantly  haunted  by  dreams  of  tierce  eagles
swooping  down  upon  him.  until  the  nightmare  was  finally  exorcised
after  a  lone-  course  of  priestly  treatment.  In  1890  there  was  but  one
eagle  killer  remaining  among  the  East  Cherokee.  It  does  not  appear
that  the  eagle  was  ever  captured  alive  as  among  the  plains  tribes.
The  eagle  must  be  killed  only  in  the  winter  or  late  fall  after  the
crops  were  gathered  and  the  snakes  had  retired  to  their  dens.  If  killed
in  the  summertime  a  frost  would  come  to  destroy  the  corn,  while  the
songs  of  the  Eagle  dance,  when  tlie  feathers  were  brought  home,
would  so  anger  the  snakes  that  they  would  become  doubly  dangerous.
Consequently  the  Eagle  songs  were  never  sung  until  after  the  snakes
had  gone  to  sleep  for  the  winter.
When  the  people  of  a  town   had  decided   upon  an    Eagle  dance  the


282 MYTHS    OF    THE    CHKKoKKK [ETH.  ANN.  19
eagle  killer  was  called  in.  frequently  from  a  distant  settlement,  to
procure  the  feathers  for  the  occasion.  He  was  paid  for  his  services
from  offerings  made  later  at  the  dance,  and  as  the  few  professionals
guarded  their  secrets  carefully  from  outsiders  their  business  was  a  quite
profitable  one.  After  some  preliminary  preparation  the  eagle  killer
sets  out  alone  for  the  mountains,  taking  with  him  his  gun  or  bow  and
arrows.  Having  reached  the  mountains,  he  goes  through  a  vigil  of
prayer  and  fasting,  possibly  lasting  four  days,  after  which  he  hunts
until  he  succeeds  in  killing  a  deer.     Then,  placing  the  body  in  a  con-
1  .r™i|Pr s
IT!  IP j
Fig.  1 — Feather  wand  of  Eagle  dance  (made  by  John  Ax).
venient  exposed  situation  upon  one  of  the  highest  cliffs,  he  conceals
himself  near  by  and  begins  to  sing  in  a  low  undertone  the  songs  to  call
down  the  eagles  from  the  sky.  When  the  eagle  alights  upon  the  car-
cass, which  will  be  almost  immediately  if  the  singer  understands  his
business,  he  shoots  it,  and  then  standing  over  the  dead  bird,  he
addresses  to  it  a  prayer  in  which  he  begs  it  not  to  seek  vengeance
upon  his  tribe,  because  it  is  not  a  Cherokee,  but  a  Spaniard  (Askwa'ni) that  has  done  the  deed.  The  selection  of  such  a  vicarious  victim
of  revenge  is  evidence  at  once  of  the  antiquity  of  the  prayer  in  its
present  form  and  of  the  enduring  impression  which  the  cruelties  of
the  early  Spanish  adventurers  made  upon  the  natives.


MOONKYl  THE    EAGLE — THE    RAVEN  283
The  piaycr  ended,  be  leaves  the  dead  eagle  where  it  fell  and  makes
all  haste  to  the  settlement,  where  the  people  are  anxiously  expecting
his  return.  On  meeting  the  first  warriors  he  says  simply,  "A  -now
bird  has  died."  and  passes  on  at  once  to  his  own  quarters,  hi-  work being  now  finished.  The  announcement  is  made  in  this  form  in  order
to  insure  against  the  vengeance  of  any  eagles  that  might  overhear,  the
little  snowbird  being  considered  too  insignificant  a  creature  to  be
dreaded.
Having  waited  four  days  to  allow  time  for  the  insect  parasites  to
leave  the  body,  the  hunters  delegated  for  the  purpose  go  out  to  bring
in  the  feathers.  On  arriving'  at  the  place  they  strip  the  body  of  the
large  tail  and  wing  feathers,  which  they  wrap  in  a  fresh  deerskin
brought  with  them,  and  then  return  to  the  settlement,  leaving  the
body  of  the  dead  eagle  upon  the  ground,  together  with  that  of  the
slain  deer,  the  latter  being  intended  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  eagle  spirits.
On  reaching  the  settlement,  the  feathers,  still  wrapped  in  the  deer-
skin. arc1  hung  up  in  a  small,  round  hut  built  for  this  special  purpose
near  the  edge  of  the  dance  ground  (detsdnHfl'li)  and  known  as  the
place  "where  the  feathers  are  kept,"  or  feather  house.  Some  settle- ments had  two  such  feather  houses,  one  at  each  end  of  the  dance
ground.  The  Eagle  dance  was  held  on  the  night  of  the  same  day  on
which  the  feathers  were  brought  in.  all  the,  necessary  arrangements
having  been  made  beforehand.  In  the  meantime,  as  the  feathers  were
supposed  to  be  hungry  after  their  journey,  a  dish  of  venison  and  corn
was  set  upon  the  ground  below  them  and  they  were  invited  to  eat.
The  body  of  a  flaxbird  or  scarlet  tanager  {Piranga  rubra)  was  also
hung  up  with  the  feathers  for  the  same  purpose.  The  food  thus  given
to  the  feathers  was  disposed  of  after  the  dance,  a-  described  in  another
place.
The  eagle  being  regarded  as  a  great  ada'wehl,  only  the  greatest  war- riors and  those  versed  in  the  sacred  ordinances  would  dare  to  wear  the
feathers  or  to  carry  them  in  the  dance.  Should  any  person  in  the  settle-
ment dream  of  eagles  or  eagle  feathers  he  must  arrange  for  an  Eagle
dance,  with  the  usual  vigil  and  fasting,  at  the  first  opportunity;  other-
wise some  one  of  his  family  will  die.  Should  the  insect  parasites
which  infest  the  feathers  of  the  bird  in  life  get  upon  a  man  they  will
breed  a  skin  disease  which  is  sure  to  develop,  even  though  it  may  lie
latent  for  years.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  body  of  the  eagle  is
allowed  to  remain  four  days  upon  the  ground  before   being  brought
into  the  settlement.
The  raven  (kd'ldnU)  is  occasionally  seen  in  the  mountains,  but  i-  not
prominent  in  folk  belief,  excepting  in  connection  with  the  grewsome
tale-  of  the  Haven  Mocker  (q.  v.).  In  former  times  its  name  was  some
times  assumed  as  a  war  title.  The  crow,  so  prominent  in  other  tribal
mythologies,  does  not  seem  to  appear  in  that  of  the  Cherokee.     Three


284  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
varieties  of  owls  are  recognized,  each  under  a  different  name,  viz:
tsl.ih',  the  dusky  horned  owl  (£ubo  virginiamus  satnifgius)',  u'guku',
the  barred  or  hooting  owl  {Syrniwn  nebulosivm),  and  wa  huku',  the
screech  owl  ( M<  gascops  a$io).  The  first  of  these  names  signifies  a  witch.
the  others  being  onomatopes.  Owls  and  other  night-crying  birds  are
believed  to  be  embodied  ghosts  or  disguised  witches,  and  their  cry  is
dreaded  as  a  sound  of  evil  omen.  If  the  eyes  of  a  child  be  bathed
with  water  in  which  one  of  the  long  wing  or  tail  feathers  of  an  owl
has  been  soaked,  the  child  will  be  able  to  keep  awake  all  night.  The
feather  must  be  found  by  chance,  and  not  procured  intentionally  for
the  purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  an  application  of  water  in  which
the  feather  of  a  blue  jay,  procured  in  the  same  way,  has  been  .soaked
will  make  the  child  an  early  riser.
The  buzzard  (suli')  is  said  to  have  had  a  part  in  shaping  the  earth,
as  was  narrated  in  the  genesis  myth.  It  is  reputed  to  be  a  doctor
among  birds,  and  is  respected  accordingly,  although  its  feathers  are
never  worn  by  ball  players,  for  fear  of  becoming  bald.  Its  own  bald-
ness is  accounted  for  by  a  vulgar  story.  As  it  thrives  upon  carrion
and  decay,  it  is  held  to  be  immune  from  sickness,  especially  of  a  con-
tagious character,  and  a  small  quantity  of  its  flesh  eaten,  or  of  the
soup  used  as  a  wash,  is  believed  to  be  a  sure  preventive  of  smallpox,
and  was  used  for  this  purpose  during  the  smallpox  epidemic  among
the  East  Cherokee  in  1866.  According  to  the  Wahnenauhi  manu-
script, it  is  said  also  that  a  buzzard  feather  placed  over  the  cabin  door
will  keep  out  witches.  In  treating  gunshot  wounds,  the  medicine  is
blown  into  the  wound  through  a  tube  cut  from  a  buzzard  quill  and
some  of  the  buzzard's  down  is  afterwards  laid  over  the  spot.
There  is  very  little  concerning  hawks,  excepting  as  regards  the
great  mythic  hawk,  the  Tla'nmvct'.  The  tl&'nuwti!  usdi',  or  '"little
tla'nuwa,"  is  described  as  a  bird  about  as  large  as  a  turkey  and  of  a
grayish  blue  color,  which  used  to  follow  the  flocks  of  wild  pigeons.  Hy-
ing overhead  and  darting  down  occasionally  upon  a  victim,  which  it
struck  and  killed  with  its  sharp  breast  and  ate  upon  the  wing,  without
alighting.     It  is  probably  the  goshawk  (Astur  atricapUkis).
The  common  swamp  gallinule.  locally  known  as  mudhen  or  didapper
(G-ailwadagaleata),  is  called  diga'gwwil'  (lame  or  crippled),  on  account
of  its  habit  of  flying  only  for  a  very  short  distance  at  a  time.  In  the
Diga'gwani  dance  the  performers  sing  the  name  of  the  bird  and
endeavor  to  imitate  its  halting  movements.  The  dagtitfou,  or  white-
fronted  goose  (Anser  cdiifrons),  appears  in  connection  with  the  myth
of  the  origin  of  tobacco.  The  feathers  of  the  tskw&yi,  the  great  white
heron  or  American  egret  (BJeeodias  egretta),  are  worn  by  ball  players,
and  this  bird  probably  the  "swan"  whose  white  wing  was  used  as  a
peace  emblem  in  ancient  times.
A  rare  bird  said  to  have  been  seen  occasionally  upon  the  reservation


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY  NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    XV
SAWANU'Gi,    A     CHEROKEE     BALL-PLAYER




mooney]  THE    BIRD    TRIBES  285
many  years  ago  was  called  by  the  curious  name  of  nHfldd-dikani' ',  "it
looks  at  the  sun,"  "sun-gazer."  It  is  described  as  resembling  a  blue
crane,  and  may  possibly  have  been  1 1 » *  -  Floridus  cerulea,  or  little  blue
heron.  Another  infrequent  visitor,  which  sometimes  passed  over  the
mountain  country  in  company  with  flocks  of  wild  geese,  was  the
git'wisguwi',  so  called  from  its  cry.  It  is  described  as  resembling  a
large  snipe  with  yellow  leys  ;m<i  feet  unwebbed,  and  is  thought  to
visit  Indian  Territory  at  intervals.  It  is  chiefly  notable  from  the
fact  that  the  celebrated  chief  John  Ross  derives  his  Indian  name,
Gu'wisguwi',  from  this  bird,  the  name  being  perpetuated  in  Coowee- scoowee  district  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  the  West.
Another  chance  visitant,  concerning  which  there  is  much  curious
speculation  among  the  older  men  of  the  East  Cherokee,  was  called
tsun'digwuntsu'  gi  or  tsun'digwdn'tsM,  ""forked."  referring  to  the  tail. It  appeared  but  once,  for  a  short  season,  about  forty  years  ago,  ami
has  not  been  seen  since.  It  is  said  to  have  been  pale  blue,  with  red
in  places,  and  nearly  the  size  of  a  crow,  and  to  have  had  a  lone-
forked  tail  like  that  of  a  fish.  It  preyed  upon  hornets,  which  it  took
upon  the  winy,  and  also  feasted  upon  the  larv;e  in  the  nests.  Appear
ing  unexpectedly  and  as  suddenly  disappearing,  it  was  believed  to  be
not  a  bird  but  a  transformed  red-horse  fish  {Moxostoma,  Cherokee
dligd'),  a  theory  borne  out  by  the  red  spots  and  the  long,  forked  tail.  It
is  even  maintained  that  about  the  time  those  birds  first  appeared  some
hunters  on  Oconaluftee  saw  seven  of  them  sitting  on  the  limb  of  a  tree
and  they  were  still  shaped  like  a  red-horse,  although  they  already  had
wines  and  feathers.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  scissor-tail  or  swallow-
tailed  flycatcher  (Mihndus  forficabus),  which  belongs  properly  in  Texas
and  the  adjacent  region,  but  strays  occasionally  into  the  eastern  states.
On  account  of  the  red  throat  appendage  of  the  turkey,  somewhat
resembling  the  goitrous  growth  known  in  the  South  as  "kernels"
(Cherokee,  dideUsi),  the  feathers  of  this  bird  are  not  worn  by  ball
players,  neither  is  the  neck  allowed  to  be  eaten  by  children  or  sick
persons,  under  the  fear  that  a  growth  of  "kernels"  would  be  the
result.  The  meat  of  the  rutted  grouse,  locally  known  as  the  pheasant
[Sonasa  umbettus),  is  tabued  to  a  pregnant  woman,  because  this  bird
hatches  a  large  brood,  but  loses  most  of  them  before  maturity.  Under
a  stricter  construction  of  the  theory  this  meat  is  forbidden  to  a  woman
until  she  is  past  child  bearing.
The  redbird,  tatsu'hwd,  is  believed  to  have  been  originally  the
daughter  of  the  Sun  (see  the  story).  The  huhu,  or  yellow  mocking-
bird, occurs  in  several  stories.  It  is  regarded  as  something  supernat-
ural, possibly  on  account  of  its  imitative  powers,  and  its  heart  is  given
to  children  to  make  them  quick  to  learn.
The  chickadee  {Parux  carol hunsis),  tsilili!;'.  and  the  tufted  tit-
mouse,  {Parw  bicolor),  utsu''gi,  or  u'sttiti,  are  both  regarded  as  news


286  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.  asn.19
bringers,  but  the  one  is  venerated  as  a  truth  teller  while  the  other
is  scoffed  at  as  a  lying'  messenger,  for  reasons  which  appear  in  the