Story Of King Shahryar and His Brother
 a. Tale of the Bull and the Ass
 1. Tale of the Trader and the Jinni
 a. The First Shaykh’s Story
 b. The Second Shaykh’s Story
 c. The Third Shaykh’s Story
 2. The Fisherman and the Jinni
 a. Tale of the Wazir and the Sage Duban
 ab. Story of King Sindibad and His Falcon
 ac. Tale of the Husband and the Parrot
 ad. Tale of the Prince and the Ogress
 b. Tale of the Ensorcelled Prince
 3. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad
 a. The First Kalandar’s Tale
 b. The Second Kalandar’s Tale
 ba. Tale of the Envier and the Envied
 c. The Third Kalandar’s Tale
 d. The Eldest Lady’s Tale
 e. Tale of the Portress
 Conclusion of the Story of the Porter and the Three Ladies
 4. Tale of the Three Apples
 5. Tale of Nur Al-din Ali and his Son
 6. The Hunchback’s Tale
 a. The Nazarene Broker’s Story
 b. The Reeve’s Tale
 c. Tale of the Jewish Doctor
 d. Tale of the Tailor
 e. The Barber’s Tale of Himself
 ea. The Barber’s Tale of his First Brother
 eb. The Barber’s Tale of his Second Brother
 ec. The Barber’s Tale of his Third Brother
 ed. The Barber’s Tale of his Fourth Brother
 ee. The Barber’s Tale of his Fifth Brother
 ef. The Barber’s Tale of his Sixth Brother
 The End of the Tailor’s Tale


The Translator’s Foreword.


This work, labourious as it may appear, has been to me a labour of
love, an unfailing source of solace and satisfaction. During my long
years of official banishment to the luxuriant and deadly deserts of
Western Africa, and to the dull and dreary half clearings of South
America, it proved itself a charm, a talisman against ennui and
despondency. Impossible even to open the pages without a vision
starting into view; with out drawing a picture from the pinacothek of
the brain; without reviving a host of memories and reminiscences which
are not the common property of travellers, however widely they may have
travelled. From my dull and commonplace and "respectable" surroundings,
the Jinn bore me at once to the land of my pre-dilection, Arabia, a
region so familiar to my mind that even at first sight, it seemed a
reminiscence of some by gone metem-psychic life in the distant Past.
Again I stood under the diaphanous skies, in air glorious as aether,
whose every breath raises men's spirits like sparkling wine. Once more
I saw the evening star hanging like a solitaire from the pure front of
the western firmament; and the after glow transfiguring and
transforming, as by magic, the homely and rugged features of the scene
into a fairy land lit with a light which never shines on other soils or
seas. Then would appear the woollen tents, low and black, of the true
Badawin, mere dots in the boundless waste of lion tawny clays and
gazelle brown gravels, and the camp fire dotting like a glow worm the
village centre. Presently, sweetened by distance, would be heard the
wild weird song of lads and lasses, driving or rather pelting, through
the gloaming their sheep and goats; and the measured chant of the
spearsmen gravely stalking behind their charge, the camels; mingled
with bleating of the flocks and the bellowing of the humpy herds; while
the reremouse flitted overhead with his tiny shriek, and the rave of
the jackal resounded through deepening glooms, and—most musical of
music—the palm trees answered the whispers of the night breeze with the
softest tones of falling water.

And then a shift of scene. The Shaykhs and "white beards" of the tribe
gravely take their places, sitting with outspread skirts like hillocks
on the plain, as the Arabs say, around the camp fire, whilst I reward
their hospitality and secure its continuance by reading or reciting a
few pages of their favourite tales. The women and children stand
motionless as silhouettes outside the ring; and all are breathless with
attention; they seem to drink in the words with eyes and mouths as well
as with ears. The most fantastic flights of fancy, the wildest
improbabilities, the most impossible of impossibilities, appear to them
utterly natural, mere matters of every day occurrence. They enter
thoroughly into each phase of feeling touched upon by the author: they
take a personal pride in the chivalrous nature and knightly prowess of
Taj al-Mulúk; they are touched with tenderness by the self sacrificing
love of Azízah; their mouths water as they hear of heaps of untold gold
given away in largesse like clay; they chuckle with delight every time
a Kázi or a Fakír—a judge or a reverend—is scurvily entreated by some
Pantagruelist of the Wilderness; and, despite their normal solemnity
and impassibility, all roar with laughter, sometimes rolling upon the
ground till the reader's gravity is sorely tried, at the tales of the
garrulous Barber and of Ali and the Kurdish Sharper. To this
magnetising mood the sole exception is when a Badawi of superior
accomplishments, who sometimes says his prayers, ejaculates a startling
"Astagh-faru'llah"—I pray Allah's pardon!—for listening, not to
Carlyle's "downright lies," but to light mention of the sex whose name
is never heard amongst the nobility of the Desert.

Nor was it only in Arabia that the immortal Nights did me such notable
service: I found the wildlings of Somali land equally amenable to its
discipline; no one was deaf to the charm and the two women cooks of my
caravan, on its way to Harar, were in continently dubbed by my men
"Shahrazad" and "Dinazad."

It may be permitted me also to note that this translation is a natural
outcome of my Pilgrimage to Al-Medinah and Meccah. Arriving at Aden in
the (so called) winter of 1852, I put up with my old and dear friend,
Steinhaeuser, to whose memory this volume is inscribed; and, when
talking over Arabia and the Arabs, we at once came to the same
conclusion that, while the name of this wondrous treasury of Moslem
folk lore is familiar to almost every English child, no general reader
is aware of the valuables it contains, nor indeed will the door open to
any but Arabists. Before parting we agreed to "collaborate" and produce
a full, complete, unvarnished, uncastrated copy of the great original,
my friend taking the prose and I the metrical part; and we corresponded
upon the subject for years. But whilst I was in the Brazil,
Steinhaeuser died suddenly of apoplexy at Berne in Switzerland and,
after the fashion of Anglo India, his valuable MSS. left at Aden were
dispersed, and very little of his labours came into my hands.

Thus I was left alone to my work, which progressed fitfully amid a host
of obstructions. At length, in the spring of 1879, the tedious process
of copying began and the book commenced to take finished form. But,
during the winter of 1881-82, I saw in the literary journals a notice
of a new version by Mr. John Payne, well known to scholars for his
prowess in English verse, especially for his translation of "The Poems
of Master Francis Villon, of Paris." Being then engaged on an
expedition to the Gold Coast (for gold), which seemed likely to cover
some months, I wrote to the "Athenæum" (Nov. 13, 1881) and to Mr.
Payne, who was wholly unconscious that we were engaged on the same
work, and freely offered him precedence and possession of the field
till no longer wanted. He accepted my offer as frankly, and his
priority entailed another delay lasting till the spring of 1885. These
details will partly account for the lateness of my appearing, but there
is yet another cause. Professional ambition suggested that literary
labours, unpopular with the vulgar and the half educated, are not
likely to help a man up the ladder of promotion. But common sense
presently suggested to me that, professionally speaking, I was not a
success, and, at the same time, that I had no cause to be ashamed of my
failure. In our day, when we live under a despotism of the lower
"middle class" Philister who can pardon anything but superiority, the
prizes of competitive services are monopolized by certain "pets" of the
_Médiocratie_, and prime favourites of that jealous and potent
majority—the Mediocrities who know "no nonsense about merit." It is
hard for an outsider to realise how perfect is the monopoly of common
place, and to comprehend how fatal a stumbling stone that man sets in
the way of his own advancement who dares to think for himself, or who
knows more or who does more than the mob of gentlemen-employés who know
very little and who do even less.

Yet, however behindhand I may be, there is still ample room and verge
for an English version of the "Arabian Nights' Entertainments."

Our century of translations, popular and vernacular, from (Professor
Antoine) Galland's delightful abbreviation and adaptation (A.D. 1704),
in no wise represent the eastern original. The best and latest, the
Rev. Mr. Foster's, which is diffuse and verbose, and Mr. G. Moir
Bussey's, which is a re-correction, abound in gallicisms of style and
idiom; and one and all degrade a chef d'oeuvre of the highest
anthropological and ethnographical interest and importance to a mere
fairy book, a nice present for little boys.

After nearly a century had elapsed, Dr. Jonathan Scott (LL.D.
H.E.I.C.'s S., Persian Secretary to the G. G. Bengal; Oriental
Professor, etc., etc.), printed his "Tales, Anecdotes, and Letters,
translated from the Arabic and Persian," (Cadell and Davies, London,
A.D. 1800); and followed in 1811 with an edition of "The Arabian
Nights' Entertainments" from the MS. of Edward Wortley Montague (in 6
vols., small 8vo, London: Longmans, etc.). This work he (and he only)
describes as "Carefully revised and occasionally corrected from the
Arabic." The reading public did not wholly reject it, sundry texts were
founded upon the Scott version and it has been imperfectly reprinted (4
vole., 8vo, Nimmo and Bain, London, 1883). But most men, little recking
what a small portion of the original they were reading, satisfied
themselves with the Anglo French epitome and metaphrase. At length in
1838, Mr. Henry Torrens, B.A., Irishman, lawyer ("of the Inner Temple")
and Bengal Civilian, took a step in the right direction; and began to
translate, "The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night," (1 vol.,
8vo, Calcutta: W. Thacker and Co.) from the Arabic of the Ægyptian (!)
MS. edited by Mr. (afterwards Sir)William H. Macnaghten. The attempt,
or rather the intention, was highly creditable; the copy was carefully
moulded upon the model and offered the best example of the _verbatim et
literatim_ style. But the plucky author knew little of Arabic, and
least of what is most wanted, the dialect of Egypt and Syria. His prose
is so conscientious as to offer up spirit at the shrine of letter; and
his verse, always whimsical, has at times a manner of Hibernian whoop
which is comical when it should be pathetic. Lastly he printed only one
volume of a series which completed would have contained nine or ten.

That amiable and devoted Arabist, the late Edward William Lane does not
score a success in his "New Translation of the Tales of a Thousand and
One Nights" (London: Charles Knight and Co., MDCCCXXXIX.) of which
there have been four English editions, besides American, two edited by
E. S. Poole. He chose the abbreviating Bulak Edition; and, of its two
hundred tales, he has omitted about half and by far the more
characteristic half: the work was intended for "the drawing room
table;" and, consequently, the workman was compelled to avoid the
"objectionable" and aught "approaching to licentiousness." He converts
the Arabian Nights into the Arabian Chapters, arbitrarily changing the
division and, worse still, he converts some chapters into notes. He
renders poetry by prose and apologises for not omitting it altogether:
he neglects assonance and he is at once too Oriental and not Oriental
enough. He had small store of Arabic at the time—Lane of the Nights is
not Lane of the Dictionary—and his pages are disfigured by many
childish mistakes. Worst of all, the three handsome volumes are
rendered unreadable as Sale's Koran by their anglicised Latin, their
sesquipedalian un English words, and the stiff and stilted style of
half a century ago when our prose was, perhaps, the worst in Europe.
Their cargo of Moslem learning was most valuable to the student, but
utterly out of place for readers of "The Nights;" re-published, as
these notes have been separately (London, Chatto, 1883), they are an
ethnological text book.

Mr. John Payne has printed, for the Villon Society and for private
circulation only, the first and sole complete translation of the great
compendium, "comprising about four times as much matter as that of
Galland, and three times as much as that of any other translator;" and
I cannot but feel proud that he has honoured me with the dedication of
"The Book of The Thousand Nights and One Night." His version is most
readable: his English, with a sub-flavour of the Mabinogionic
archaicism, is admirable; and his style gives life and light to the
nine volumes whose matter is frequently heavy enough. He succeeds
admirably in the most difficult passages and he often hits upon choice
and special terms and the exact vernacular equivalent of the foreign
word, so happily and so picturesquely that all future translators must
perforce use the same expression under pain of falling far short. But
the learned and versatile author bound himself to issue only five
hundred copies, and "not to reproduce the work in its complete and
uncastrated form." Consequently his excellent version is caviaire to
the general—practically unprocurable.

And here I hasten to confess that ample use has been made of the three
versions above noted, the whole being blended by a _callida junctura_
into a homogeneous mass. But in the presence of so many predecessors a
writer is bound to show some _raison d'être_ for making a fresh attempt
and this I proceed to do with due reserve.

Briefly, the object of this version is to show what "The Thousand
Nights and a Night" really is. Not, however, for reasons to be more
fully stated in the Terminal Essay, by straining _verbum reddere
verbo_, but by writing as the Arab would have written in English. On
this point I am all with Saint Jerome (Pref. in Jobum) "Vel verbum e
verbo, vel sensum e sensu, vel ex utroque commixtum, et medie
temperatum genus translationis." My work claims to be a faithful copy
of the great Eastern Saga book, by preserving intact, not only the
spirit, but even the _mécanique_, the manner and the matter. Hence,
however prosy and long drawn out be the formula, it retains the scheme
of The Nights because they are a prime feature in the original. The
Ráwí or reciter, to whose wits the task of supplying details is left,
well knows their value: the openings carefully repeat the names of the
_dramatis personæ_ and thus fix them in the hearer's memory. Without
the Nights no Arabian Nights! Moreover it is necessary to retain the
whole apparatus: nothing more ill advised than Dr. Jonathan Scott's
strange device of garnishing The Nights with fancy head pieces and tail
pieces or the splitting up of Galland's narrative by merely prefixing
"Nuit," etc., ending moreover, with the ccxxxivth Night: yet this has
been done, apparently with the consent of the great Arabist Sylvestre
de Sacy (Paris, Ernest Bourdin). Moreover, holding that the
translator's glory is to add something to his native tongue, while
avoiding the hideous hag like nakedness of Torrens and the bald
literalism of Lane, I have carefully Englished the picturesque turns
and novel expressions of the original in all their outlandishness; for
instance, when the dust cloud raised by a tramping host is described as
"walling the horizon." Hence peculiar attention has been paid to the
tropes and figures which the Arabic language often packs into a single
term; and I have never hesitated to coin a word when wanted, such as
"she snorted and snarked," fully to represent the original. These, like
many in Rabelais, are mere barbarisms unless generally adopted; in
which case they become civilised and common currency.

Despite objections manifold and manifest, I have preserved the balance
of sentences and the prose rhyme and rhythm which Easterns look upon as
mere music. This "Saj'a," or cadence of the cooing dove, has in Arabic
its special duties. It adds a sparkle to description and a point to
proverb, epigram and dialogue; it corresponds with our "artful
alliteration" (which in places I have substituted for it) and,
generally, it defines the boundaries between the classical and the
popular styles which jostle each other in The Nights. If at times it
appear strained and forced, after the wont of rhymed prose, the scholar
will observe that, despite the immense copiousness of assonants and
consonants in Arabic, the strain is often put upon it intentionally,
like the _Rims cars_ of Dante and the Troubadours. This rhymed prose
may be "un English" and unpleasant, even irritating to the British ear;
still I look upon it as a _sine quâ non_ for a complete reproduction of
the original. In the Terminal Essay I shall revert to the subject.

On the other hand when treating the versical portion, which may
represent a total of ten thousand lines, I have not always bound myself
by the metrical bonds of the Arabic, which are artificial in the
extreme, and which in English can be made bearable only by a tour de
force. I allude especially to the monorhyme, _Rim continuat or tirade
monorime_, whose monotonous simplicity was preferred by the Troubadours
for threnodies. It may serve well for three or four couplets but, when
it extends, as in the Ghazal-canzon, to eighteen, and in the Kasidah,
elegy or ode, to more, it must either satisfy itself with banal rhyme
words, when the assonants should as a rule be expressive and emphatic;
or, it must display an ingenuity, a smell of the oil, which assuredly
does not add to the reader's pleasure. It can perhaps be done and it
should be done; but for me the task has no attractions: I can fence
better in shoes than in sabots. Finally I print the couplets in Arab
form separating the hemistichs by asterisks.

And now to consider one matter of special importance in the book—its
_turpiloquium_. This stumbling-block is of two kinds, completely
distinct. One is the simple, naïve and child like indecency which, from
Tangiers to Japan, occurs throughout general conversation of high and
low in the present day. It uses, like the holy books of the Hebrews,
expressions "plainly descriptive of natural situations;" and it treats
in an unconventionally free and naked manner of subjects and matters
which are usually, by common consent, left undescribed. As Sir William
Jones observed long ago, "that anything natural can be offensively
obscene never seems to have occurred to the Indians or to their
legislators; a singularity (?) pervading their writings and
conversation, but no proof of moral depravity." Another justly
observes, _Les peuples primitifs n'y entendent pas malice: ils
appellent les choses par leurs noms et ne trouvent pas condamnable ce
qui est naturel_. And they are prying as children. For instance the
European novelist marries off his hero and heroine and leaves them to
consummate marriage in privacy; even Tom Jones has the decency to bolt
the door. But the Eastern story teller, especially this unknown "prose
Shakespeare," must usher you, with a flourish, into the bridal chamber
and narrate to you, with infinite gusto, everything he sees and hears.
Again we must remember that grossness and indecency, in fact _les
turpitudes_, are matters of time and place; what is offensive in
England is not so in Egypt; what scandalises us now would have been a
tame joke _tempore Elisæ_. Withal The Nights will not be found in this
matter coarser than many passages of Shakespeare, Sterne, and Swift,
and their uncleanness rarely attains the perfection of Alcofribas
Nasier, "divin maître et atroce cochon." The other element is absolute
obscenity, sometimes, but not always, tempered by wit, humour and
drollery; here we have an exaggeration of Petronius Arbiter, the
handiwork of writers whose ancestry, the most religious and the most
debauched of mankind, practised every abomination before the shrine of
the Canopic Gods.

In accordance with my purpose of reproducing the Nights, not
_virginibus puerisque_, but in as perfect a picture as my powers
permit, I have carefully sought out the English equivalent of every
Arabic word, however low it may be or "shocking" to ears polite;
preserving, on the other hand, all possible delicacy where the
indecency is not intentional; and, as a friend advises me to state, not
exaggerating the vulgarities and the indecencies which, indeed, can
hardly be exaggerated. For the coarseness and crassness are but the
shades of a picture which would otherwise be all lights. The general
tone of The Nights is exceptionally high and pure. The devotional
fervour often rises to the boiling point of fanaticism. The pathos is
sweet, deep and genuine; tender, simple and true, utterly unlike much
of our modern tinsel. Its life, strong, splendid and multitudinous, is
everywhere flavoured with that unaffected pessimism and constitutional
melancholy which strike deepest root under the brightest skies and
which sigh in the face of heaven:—

Vita quid est hominis? Viridis floriscula mortis;
Sole Oriente oriens, sole cadente cadens.


Poetical justice is administered by the literary Kází with exemplary
impartiality and severity; "denouncing evil doers and eulogising deeds
admirably achieved." The morale is sound and healthy; and at times we
descry, through the voluptuous and libertine picture, vistas of a
transcendental morality, the morality of Socrates in Plato. Subtle
corruption and covert licentiousness are utterly absent; we find more
real"vice" in many a short French roman, say La Dame aux Camélias, and
in not a few English novels of our day than in the thousands of pages
of the Arab. Here we have nothing of that most immodest modern modesty
which sees covert implication where nothing is implied, and "improper"
allusion when propriety is not outraged; nor do we meet with the
Nineteenth Century refinement; innocence of the word not of the
thought; morality of the tongue not of the heart, and the sincere
homage paid to virtue in guise of perfect hypocrisy. It is, indeed,
this unique contrast of a quaint element, childish crudities and
nursery indecencies and "vain and amatorious" phrase jostling the
finest and highest views of life and character, shown in the
kaleidoscopic shiftings of the marvellous picture with many a "rich
truth in a tale's pretence", pointed by a rough dry humour which
compares well with "wut; "the alternations of strength and weakness, of
pathos and bathos, of the boldest poetry (the diction of Job) and the
baldest prose (the Egyptian of today); the contact of religion and
morality with the orgies of African Apuleius and Petronius Arbiter—at
times taking away the reader's breath—and, finally, the whole dominated
everywhere by that marvellous Oriental fancy, wherein the spiritual and
the supernatural are as common as the material and the natural; it is
this contrast, I say, which forms the chiefest charm of The Nights,
which gives it the most striking originality and which makes it a
perfect expositor of the medieval Moslem mind.

Explanatory notes did not enter into Mr. Payne's plan. They do with
mine: I can hardly imagine The Nights being read to any profit by men
of the West without commentary. My annotations avoid only one subject,
parallels of European folklore and fabliaux which, however interesting,
would overswell the bulk of a book whose speciality is anthropology.
The accidents of my life, it may be said without undue presumption, my
long dealings with Arabs and other Mahommedans, and my familiarity not
only with their idiom but with their turn of thought, and with that
racial individuality which baffles description, have given me certain
advantages over the average student, however deeply he may have
studied. These volumes, moreover, afford me a long sought opportunity
of noticing practices and customs which interest all mankind and which
"Society" will not hear mentioned. Grote, the historian, and Thackeray,
the novelist, both lamented that the bégueulerie of their countrymen
condemned them to keep silence where publicity was required; and that
they could not even claim the partial licence of a Fielding and a
Smollett. Hence a score of years ago I lent my best help to the late
Dr. James Hunt in founding the Anthropological Society, whose
presidential chair I first occupied (pp. 2-4 Anthropologia; London,
Balliere, vol. i., No. I, 1873). My motive was to supply travellers
with an organ which would rescue their observations from the outer
darkness of manuscript, and print their curious information on social
and sexual matters out of place in the popular book intended for the
Nipptisch and indeed better kept from public view. But, hardly had we
begun when "Respectability," that whited sepulchre full of all
uncleanness, rose up against us. "Propriety" cried us down with her
brazen blatant voice, and the weak kneed brethren fell away. Yet the
organ was much wanted and is wanted still. All now known barbarous
tribes in Inner Africa, America and Australia, whose instincts have not
been overlaid by reason, have a ceremony which they call "making men."
As soon as the boy shows proofs of puberty, he and his coevals are
taken in hand by the mediciner and the Fetisheer; and, under priestly
tuition, they spend months in the "bush," enduring hardships and
tortures which impress the memory till they have mastered the "theorick
and practick" of social and sexual relations. Amongst the civilised
this fruit of the knowledge tree must be bought at the price of the
bitterest experience, and the consequences of ignorance are peculiarly
cruel. Here, then, I find at last an opportunity of noticing in
explanatory notes many details of the text which would escape the
reader's observation, and I am confident that they will form a
repertory of Eastern knowledge in its esoteric phase. The student who
adds the notes of Lane ("Arabian Society," etc., before quoted) to mine
will know as much of the Moslem East and more than many Europeans who
have spent half their lives in Orient lands. For facility of reference
an index of anthropological notes is appended to each volume.

The reader will kindly bear with the following technical details.
Steinhaeuser and I began and ended our work with the first Bulak
("Bul.") Edition printed at the port of Cairo in A.H. 1251 = A.D. 1835.
But when preparing my MSS. for print I found the text incomplete, many
of the stories being given in epitome and not a few ruthlessly
mutilated with head or feet wanting. Like most Eastern scribes the
Editor could not refrain from "improvements," which only debased the
book; and his sole title to excuse is that the second Bulak Edition (4
vols. A.H. 1279 = A.D. 1863), despite its being "revised and corrected
by Sheik Mahommed Qotch Al-Adewi," is even worse; and the same may be
said of the Cairo Edit. (4 vols. A.H. 1297 = A. D. 1881). The Calcutta
("Calc.") Edition, with ten lines of Persian preface by the Editor,
Ahmed al-Shirwani (A.D. 1814), was cut short at the end of the first
two hundred Nights, and thus made room for Sir William Hay Macnaghten's
Edition (4 vols. royal 4to) of 1839-42. This ("Mac."), as by far the
least corrupt and the most complete, has been assumed for my basis with
occasional reference to the Breslau Edition ("Bres.") wretchedly edited
from a hideous Egyptian MS. by Dr. Maximilian Habicht (1825-43). The
Bayrut Text "Alif-Leila we Leila" (4 vols. gt. 8vo, Beirut, 1881-83) is
a melancholy specimen of The Nights taken entirely from the Bulak
Edition by one Khalil Sarkis and converted to Christianity; beginning
without Bismillah, continued with scrupulous castration and ending in
ennui and disappointment. I have not used this missionary production.

As regards the transliteration of Arabic words I deliberately reject
the artful and complicated system, ugly and clumsy withal, affected by
scientific modern Orientalists. Nor is my sympathy with their prime
object, namely to fit the Roman alphabet for supplanting all others.
Those who learn languages, and many do so, by the eye as well as by the
ear, well know the advantages of a special character to distinguish,
for instance, Syriac from Arabic, Gujrati from Marathi. Again this
Roman hand bewitched may have its use in purely scientific and literary
works; but it would be wholly out of place in one whose purpose is that
of the novel, to amuse rather than to instruct. Moreover the devices
perplex the simple and teach nothing to the learned. Either the reader
knows Arabic, in which case Greek letters, italics and "upper case,"
diacritical points and similar typographic oddities are, as a rule with
some exceptions, unnecessary; or he does not know Arabic, when none of
these expedients will be of the least use to him. Indeed it is a matter
of secondary consideration what system we prefer, provided that we
mostly adhere to one and the same, for the sake of a consistency which
saves confusion to the reader. I have especially avoided that of Mr.
Lane, adopted by Mr. Payne, for special reasons against which it was
vain to protest: it represents the debased brogue of Egypt or rather of
Cairo; and such a word as Kemer (ez-Zeman) would be utterly
un-pronounceable to a Badawi. Nor have I followed the practice of my
learned friend, Reverend G. P. Badger, in mixing bars and acute
accents; the former unpleasantly remind man of those hateful dactyls
and spondees, and the latter should, in my humble opinion, be applied
to long vowels which in Arabic double, or should double, the length of
the shorts. Dr. Badger uses the acute symbol to denote accent or stress
of voice; but such appoggio is unknown to those who speak with purest
articulation; for instance whilst the European pronounces Mus-cat', and
the Arab villager Mas′-kat; the Children of the Waste, "on whose
tongues Allah descended," articulate Mas-kat. I have therefore followed
the simple system adopted in my "Pilgrimage," and have accented Arabic
words only when first used, thinking it unnecessary to preserve
throughout what is an eyesore to the reader and a distress to the
printer. In the main I follow "Johnson on Richardson," a work known to
every Anglo-Orientalist as the old and trusty companion of his studies
early and late; but even here I have made sundry deviations for reasons
which will be explained in the Terminal Essay. As words are the
embodiment of ideas and writing is of words, so the word is the spoken
word; and we should write it as pronounced. Strictly speaking, the
e-sound and the o-sound (viz. the Italian o-sound not the English which
is peculiar to us and unknown to any other tongue) are not found in
Arabic, except when the figure Imálah obliges: hence they are called
"Yá al-Majhúl" and "Waw al-Majhúl" the unknown y (í) and u. But in all
tongues vowel-sounds, the flesh which clothes the bones (consonants) of
language, are affected by the consonants which precede and more
especially which follow them, hardening and softening the articulation;
and deeper sounds accompany certain letters as the sád ( ) compared
with the sín ( ). None save a defective ear would hold, as Lane does,
"Maulid" ( = birth-festival) "more properly pronounced 'Molid.'" Yet I
prefer Khokh (peach) and Jokh (broad cloth) to Khukh and Jukh; Ohod
(mount) to Uhud; Obayd (a little slave) to Ubayd; and Hosayn (a
fortlet, not the P. N. Al-Husayn) to Husayn. As for the short e in such
words as "Memlúk" for "Mamluk" (a white slave), "Eshe" for "Asha"
(supper), and "Yemen" for "Al-Yaman," I consider it a flat Egyptianism,
insufferable to an ear which admires the Badawi pronunciation. Yet I
prefer "Shelebi" (a dandy) from the Turkish Chelebi, to "Shalabi;"
"Zebdani" (the Syrian village) to "Zabdani," and "Fes and Miknes" (by
the figure Imálah) to "Fas and Miknás,", our "Fez and Mequinez."

With respect to proper names and untranslated Arabic words I have
rejected all system in favour of common sense. When a term is
incorporated in our tongue, I refuse to follow the purist and mortify
the reader by startling innovation. For instance, Aleppo, Cairo and
Bassorah are preferred to Halab, Kahirah and Al-Basrah; when a word is
half naturalised, like Alcoran or Koran, Bashaw or Pasha, which the
French write Pacha; and Mahomet or Mohammed (for Muhammad), the modern
form is adopted because the more familiar. But I see no advantage in
retaining,, simply because they are the mistakes of a past generation,
such words as "Roc" (for Rukh),), Khalif (a pretentious blunder for
Khalífah and better written Caliph) and "genie" ( = Jinn) a mere Gallic
corruption not so terrible, however, as "a Bedouin" ( = Badawi).). As
little too would I follow Mr. Lane in foisting upon the public such
Arabisms as "Khuff" (a riding boot), "Mikra'ah" (a palm rod) and a host
of others for which we have good English equivalents. On the other hand
I would use, but use sparingly, certain Arabic exclamations, as
"Bismillah" ( = in the name of Allah!) and "Inshallah" ( = if Allah
please!), (= which have special applications and which have been made
familiar to English ears by the genius of Fraser and Morier.

I here end these desultory but necessary details to address the reader
in a few final words. He will not think lightly of my work when I
repeat to him that with the aid of my annotations supplementing Lane's,
the student will readily and pleasantly learn more of the Moslem's
manners and customs, laws and religion than is known to the average
Orientalist; and, if my labours induce him to attack the text of The
Nights he will become master of much more Arabic than the ordinary Arab
owns. This book is indeed a legacy which I bequeath to my fellow
countrymen in their hour of need. Over devotion to Hindu, and
especially to Sanskrit literature, has led them astray from those (so
called) "Semitic" studies, which are the more requisite for us as they
teach us to deal successfully with a race more powerful than any
pagans—the Moslem. Apparently England is ever forgetting that she is at
present the greatest Mohammedan empire in the world. Of late years she
has systematically neglected Arabism and, indeed, actively discouraged
it in examinations for the Indian Civil Service, where it is
incomparably more valuable than Greek and Latin. Hence, when suddenly
compelled to assume the reins of government in Moslem lands, as
Afghanistan in times past and Egypt at present, she fails after a
fashion which scandalises her few (very few) friends; and her crass
ignorance concerning the Oriental peoples which should most interest
her, exposes her to the contempt of Europe as well as of the Eastern
world. When the regrettable raids of 1883-84, culminating in the
miserable affairs of Tokar, Teb and Tamasi, were made upon the gallant
Sudani negroids, the Bisharin outlying Sawakin, who were battling for
the holy cause of liberty and religion and for escape from Turkish
task-masters and Egyptian tax-gatherers, not an English official in
camp, after the death of the gallant and lamented Major Morice, was
capable of speaking Arabic. Now Moslems are not to be ruled by raw
youths who should be at school and college instead of holding positions
of trust and emolument. He who would deal with them successfully must
be, firstly, honest and truthful and, secondly, familiar with and
favourably inclined to their manners and customs if not to their law
and religion. We may, perhaps, find it hard to restore to England those
pristine virtues, that tone and temper, which made her what she is; but
at any rate we (myself and a host of others) can offer her the means of
dispelling her ignorance concerning the Eastern races with whom she is
continually in contact.

In conclusion I must not forget to notice that the Arabic
ornamentations of these volumes were designed by my excellent friend
Yacoub Artin Pasha, of the Ministry of Instruction, Cairo, with the aid
of the well-known writing artist, Shaykh Mohammed Muunis the Cairene.
My name, Al-Hajj Abdullah ( = the Pilgrim Abdallah) was written by an
English calligrapher, the lamented Professor Palmer who found a
premature death almost within sight of Suez.

RICHARD F. BURTON

Wanderers’ Club, _August_ 15, 1885.


The Book Of The
THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT

(ALF LAYLAH WA LAYLAH.)

In the Name of Allah,
the Compassionating, the Compassionate!

PRAISE BE TO ALLAH * THE BENEFICENT KING * THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE
* LORD OF THE THREE WORLDS * WHO SET UP THE FIRMAMENT WITHOUT PILLARS
IN ITS STEAD * AND WHO STRETCHED OUT THE EARTH EVEN AS A BED * AND
GRACE, AND PRAYER-BLESSING BE UPON OUR LORD MOHAMMED * LORD OF
APOSTOLIC MEN * AND UPON HIS FAMILY AND COMPANION TRAIN * PRAYER AND
BLESSINGS ENDURING AND GRACE WHICH UNTO THE DAY OF DOOM SHALL REMAIN *
AMEN! * O THOU OF THE THREE WORLDS SOVEREIGN!


And afterwards. Verily the works and words of those gone before us have
become instances and examples to men of our modern day, that folk may
view what admonishing chances befel other folk and may therefrom take
warning; and that they may peruse the annals of antique peoples and all
that hath betided them, and be thereby ruled and restrained:—Praise,
therefore, be to Him who hath made the histories of the Past an
admonition unto the Present! Now of such instances are the tales called
"A Thousand Nights and a Night," together with their far famed legends
and wonders. Therein it is related (but Allah is All knowing of His
hidden things and All ruling and All honoured and All giving and All
gracious and All merciful [FN#1]) that, in tide of yore and in time
long gone before, there was a King of the Kings of the Banu Sásán in
the Islands of India and China, a Lord of armies and guards and
servants and dependents.[FN#2] He left only two sons, one in the prime
of manhood and the other yet a youth, while both were Knights and
Braves, albeit the elder was a doughtier horseman than the younger. So
he succeeded to the empire; when he ruled the land and lorded it over
his lieges with justice so exemplary that he was beloved by all the
peoples of his capital and of his kingdom. His name was King
Shahryár[FN#3], and he made his younger brother, Shah Zamán hight, King
of Samarcand in Barbarian land. These two ceased not to abide in their
several realms and the law was ever carried out in their dominions; and
each ruled his own kingdom, with equity and fair dealing to his
subjects, in extreme solace and enjoyment; and this condition
continually endured for a score of years. But at the end of the
twentieth twelvemonth the elder King yearned for a sight of his younger
brother and felt that he must look upon him once more. So he took
counsel with his Wazír[FN#4] about visiting him, but the Minister,
finding the project unadvisable, recommended that a letter be written
and a present be sent under his charge to the younger brother with an
invitation to visit the elder. Having accepted this advice the King
forthwith bade prepare handsome gifts, such as horses with saddles of
gem encrusted gold; Mamelukes, or white slaves; beautiful handmaids,
high breasted virgins, and splendid stuffs and costly. He then wrote a
letter to Shah Zaman expressing his warm love and great wish to see
him, ending with these words, "We therefore hope of the favour and
affection of the beloved brother that he will condescend to bestir
himself and turn his face us wards. Furthermore we have sent our Wazir
to make all ordinance for the march, and our one and only desire is to
see thee ere we die; but if thou delay or disappoint us we shall not
survive the blow. Wherewith peace be upon thee!" Then King Shahryar,
having sealed the missive and given it to the Wazir with the offerings
aforementioned, commanded him to shorten his skirts and strain his
strength and make all expedition in going and returning. "Harkening and
obedience!" quoth the Minister, who fell to making ready without stay
and packed up his loads and prepared all his requisites without delay.
This occupied him three days, and on the dawn of the fourth he took
leave of his King and marched right away, over desert and hill' way,
stony waste and pleasant lea without halting by night or by day. But
whenever he entered a realm whose ruler was subject to his Suzerain,
where he was greeted with magnificent gifts of gold and silver and all
manner of presents fair and rare, he would tarry there three
days,[FN#5] the term of the guest rite; and, when he left on the
fourth, he would be honourably escorted for a whole day's march. As
soon as the Wazir drew near Shah Zaman's court in Samarcand he
despatched to report his arrival one of his high officials, who
presented himself before the King; and, kissing ground between his
hands, delivered his message. Hereupon the King commanded sundry of his
Grandees and Lords of his realm to fare forth and meet his brother's
Wazir at the distance of a full day's journey; which they did, greeting
him respectfully and wishing him all prosperity and forming an escort
and a procession. When he entered the city he proceeded straightway to
the palace, where he presented himself in the royal presence; and,
after kissing ground and praying for the King's health and happiness
and for victory over all his enemies, he informed him that his brother
was yearning to see him, and prayed for the pleasure of a visit. He
then delivered the letter which Shah Zaman took from his hand and read:
it contained sundry hints and allusions which required thought; but,
when the King had fully comprehended its import, he said, "I hear and I
obey the commands of the beloved brother!" adding to the Wazir, "But we
will not march till after the third day's hospitality." He appointed
for the Minister fitting quarters of the palace; and, pitching tents
for the troops, rationed them with whatever they might require of meat
and drink and other necessaries. On the fourth day he made ready for
wayfare and got together sumptuous presents befitting his elder
brother's majesty, and stablished his chief Wazir viceroy of the land
during his absence. Then he caused his tents and camels and mules to be
brought forth and encamped, with their bales and loads, attendants and
guards, within sight of the city, in readiness to set out next morning
for his brother's capital. But when the night was half spent he
bethought him that he had forgotten in his palace somewhat which he
should have brought with him, so he re turned privily and entered his
apartments, where he found the Queen, his wife, asleep on his own
carpet bed, embracing with both arms a black cook of loathsome aspect
and foul with kitchen grease and grime. When he saw this the world
waxed black before his sight and he said, "If such case happen while I
am yet within sight of the city what will be the doings of this damned
whore during my long absence at my brother's court?" So he drew his
scymitar and, cutting the two in four pieces with a single blow, left
them on the carpet and returned presently to his camp without letting
anyone know of what had happened. Then he gave orders for immediate
departure and set out at once and began his travel; but he could not
help thinking over his wife's treason and he kept ever saying to
himself, "How could she do this deed by me? How could she work her own
death?," till excessive grief seized him, his colour changed to yellow,
his body waxed weak and he was threatened with a dangerous malady, such
an one as bringeth men to die. So the Wazir shortened his stages and
tarried long at the watering stations and did his best to solace the
King. Now when Shah Zaman drew near the capital of his brother he
despatched vaunt couriers and messengers of glad tidings to announce
his arrival, and Shahryar came forth to meet him with his Wazirs and
Emirs and Lords and Grandees of his realm; and saluted him and joyed
with exceeding joy and caused the city to be decorated in his honour.
When, however, the brothers met, the elder could not but see the change
of complexion in the younger and questioned him of his case whereto he
replied, "Tis caused by the travails of wayfare and my case needs care,
for I have suffered from the change of water and air! but Allah be
praised for reuniting me with a brother so dear and so rare!" On this
wise he dissembled and kept his secret, adding, "O King of the time and
Caliph of the tide, only toil and moil have tinged my face yellow with
bile and hath made my eyes sink deep in my head." Then the two entered
the capital in all honour; and the elder brother lodged the younger in
a palace overhanging the pleasure garden; and, after a time, seeing his
condition still unchanged, he attributed it to his separation from his
country and kingdom. So he let him wend his own ways and asked no
questions of him till one day when he again said, "O my brother, I see
thou art grown weaker of body and yellower of colour." "O my brother,"
replied Shah Zaman "I have an internal wound:"[FN#6] still he would not
tell him what he had witnessed in his wife. Thereupon Shahryar summoned
doctors and surgeons and bade them treat his brother according to the
rules of art, which they did for a whole month; but their sherbets and
potions naught availed, for he would dwell upon the deed of his wife,
and despondency, instead of diminishing, prevailed, and leach craft
treatment utterly failed. One day his elder brother said to him, "I am
going forth to hunt and course and to take my pleasure and pastime;
maybe this would lighten thy heart." Shah Zaman, however, refused,
saying, "O my brother, my soul yearneth for naught of this sort and I
entreat thy favour to suffer me tarry quietly in this place, being
wholly taken up with my malady." So King Shah Zaman passed his night in
the palace and, next morning, when his brother had fared forth, he
removed from his room and sat him down at one of the lattice windows
overlooking the pleasure grounds; and there he abode thinking with
saddest thought over his wife's betrayal and burning sighs issued from
his tortured breast. And as he continued in this case lo! a postern of
the palace, which was carefully kept private, swung open and out of it
came twenty slave girls surrounding his bother's wife who was wondrous
fair, a model of beauty and comeliness and symmetry and perfect
loveliness and who paced with the grace of a gazelle which panteth for
the cooling stream. Thereupon Shah Zaman drew back from the window, but
he kept the bevy in sight espying them from a place whence he could not
be espied. They walked under the very lattice and advanced a little way
into the garden till they came to a jetting fountain amiddlemost a
great basin of water; then they stripped off their clothes and behold,
ten of them were women, concubines of the King, and the other ten were
white slaves. Then they all paired off, each with each: but the Queen,
who was left alone, presently cried out in a loud voice, "Here to me, O
my lord Saeed!" and then sprang with a drop leap from one of the trees
a big slobbering blackamoor with rolling eyes which showed the whites,
a truly hideous sight.[FN#7] He walked boldly up to her and threw his
arms round her neck while she embraced him as warmly; then he bussed
her and winding his legs round hers, as a button loop clasps a button,
he threw her and enjoyed her. On like wise did the other slaves with
the girls till all had satisfied their passions, and they ceased not
from kissing and clipping, coupling and carousing till day began to
wane; when the Mamelukes rose from the damsels' bosoms and the
blackamoor slave dismounted from the Queen's breast; the men resumed
their disguises and all, except the negro who swarmed up the tree,
entered the palace and closed the postern door as before. Now, when
Shah Zaman saw this conduct of his sister in law he said in himself,
"By Allah, my calamity is lighter than this! My brother is a greater
King among the kings than I am, yet this infamy goeth on in his very
palace, and his wife is in love with that filthiest of filthy slaves.
But this only showeth that they all do it[FN#8] and that there is no
woman but who cuckoldeth her husband, then the curse of Allah upon one
and all and upon the fools who lean against them for support or who
place the reins of conduct in their hands." So he put away his
melancholy and despondency, regret and repine, and allayed his sorrow
by constantly repeating those words, adding, " 'Tis my conviction that
no man in this world is safe from their malice!" When supper time came
they brought him the trays and he ate with voracious appetite, for he
had long refrained from meat, feeling unable to touch any dish however
dainty. Then he returned grateful thanks to Almighty Allah, praising
Him and blessing Him, and he spent a most restful night, it having been
long since he had savoured the sweet food of sleep. Next day he broke
his fast heartily and began to recover health and strength, and
presently regained excellent condition. His brother came back from the
chase ten days after, when he rode out to meet him and they saluted
each other; and when King Shahryar looked at King Shah Zaman he saw how
the hue of health had returned to him, how his face had waxed ruddy and
how he ate with an appetite after his late scanty diet. He wondered
much and said, "O my brother, I was so anxious that thou wouldst join
me in hunting and chasing, and wouldst take thy pleasure and pastime in
my dominion!" He thanked him and excused himself; then the two took
horse and rode into the city and, when they were seated at their ease
in the palace, the food trays were set before them and they ate their
sufficiency. After the meats were removed and they had washed their
hands, King Shahryar turned to his brother and said, "My mind is
overcome with wonderment at thy condition. I was desirous to carry thee
with me to the chase but I saw thee changed in hue, pale and wan to
view, and in sore trouble of mind too. But now Alham-dolillah—glory be
to God!—I see thy natural colour hath returned to thy face and that
thou art again in the best of case. It was my belief that thy sickness
came of severance from thy family and friends, and absence from capital
and country, so I refrained from troubling thee with further questions.
But now I beseech thee to expound to me the cause of thy complaint and
thy change of colour, and to explain the reason of thy recovery and the
return to the ruddy hue of health which I am wont to view. So speak out
and hide naught!" When Shah Zaman heard this he bowed groundwards
awhile his head, then raised it and said, "I will tell thee what caused
my complaint and my loss of colour; but excuse my acquainting thee with
the cause of its return to me and the reason of my complete recovery:
indeed I pray thee not to press me for a reply." Said Shahryar, who was
much surprised by these words, "Let me hear first what produced thy
pallor and thy poor condition." "Know, then, O my brother," rejoined
Shah Zaman, "that when thou sentest thy Wazir with the invitation to
place myself between thy hands, I made ready and marched out of my
city; but presently I minded me having left behind me in the palace a
string of jewels intended as a gift to thee. I returned for it alone
and found my wife on my carpet bed and in the arms of a hideous black
cook. So I slew the twain and came to thee, yet my thoughts brooded
over this business and I lost my bloom and became weak. But excuse me
if I still refuse to tell thee what was the reason of my complexion
returning." Shahryar shook his head, marvelling with extreme marvel,
and with the fire of wrath flaming up from his heart, he cried,
"Indeed, the malice of woman is mighty!" Then he took refuge from them
with Allah and said, "In very sooth, O my brother, thou hast escaped
many an evil by putting thy wife to death,[FN#9] and right excusable
were thy wrath and grief for such mishap which never yet befel crowned
King like thee. By Allah, had the case been mine, I would not have been
satisfied without slaying a thousand women and that way madness lies!
But now praise be to Allah who hath tempered to thee thy tribulation,
and needs must thou acquaint me with that which so suddenly restored to
thee complexion and health, and explain to me what causeth this
concealment." "O King of the Age, again I pray thee excuse my so
doing!" "Nay, but thou must." "I fear, O my brother, lest the recital
cause thee more anger and sorrow than afflicted me." "That were but a
better reason," quoth Shahryar, "for telling me the whole history, and
I conjure thee by Allah not to keep back aught from me." Thereupon Shah
Zaman told him all he had seen, from commencement to conclusion, ending
with these words, "When I beheld thy calamity and the treason of thy
wife, O my brother, and I reflected that thou art in years my senior
and in sovereignty my superior, mine own sorrow was belittled by the
comparison, and my mind recovered tone and temper: so throwing off
melancholy and despondency, I was able to eat and drink and sleep, and
thus I speedily regained health and strength. Such is the truth and the
whole truth." When King Shahryar heard this he waxed wroth with
exceeding wrath, and rage was like to strangle him; but presently he
recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I would not give thee the
lie in this matter, but I cannot credit it till I see it with mine own
eyes." "An thou wouldst look upon thy calamity," quoth Shah Zaman,
"rise at once and make ready again for hunting and coursing.[FN#10] and
then hide thyself with me, so shalt thou witness it and thine eyes
shall verify it." "True," quoth the King; whereupon he let make
proclamation of his intent to travel, and the troops and tents fared
forth without the city, camping within sight, and Shahryar sallied out
with them and took seat amidmost his host, bidding the slaves admit no
man to him. When night came on he summoned his Wazir and said to him,
"Sit thou in my stead and let none wot of my absence till the term of
three days." Then the brothers disguised themselves and returned by
night with all secrecy to the palace, where they passed the dark hours:
and at dawn they seated themselves at the lattice overlooking the
pleasure grounds, when presently the Queen and her handmaids came out
as before, and passing under the windows made for the fountain. Here
they stripped, ten of them being men to ten women, and the King's wife
cried out, "Where art thou, O Saeed?" The hideous blackamoor dropped
from the tree straightway; and, rushing into her arms without stay or
delay, cried out, "I am Sa'ad al Din Saood!"[FN#11] The lady laughed
heartily, and all fell to satisfying their lusts, and remained so
occupied for a couple of hours, when the white slaves rose up from the
handmaidens' breasts and the blackamoor dismounted from the Queen's
bosom: then they went into the basin and, after performing the Ghusl,
or complete ablution, donned their dresses and retired as they had done
before. When King Shahryar saw this infamy of his wife and concubines
he became as one distraught and he cried out, "Only in utter solitude
can man be safe from the doings of this vile world! By Allah, life is
naught but one great wrong." Presently he added, "Do not thwart me, O
my brother, in what I propose;" and the other answered, "I will not."
So he said, "Let us up as we are and depart forthright hence, for we
have no concern with Kingship, and let us overwander Allah's earth,
worshipping the Almighty till we find some one to whom the like
calamity hath happened; and if we find none then will death be more
welcome to us than life." So the two brothers issued from a second
private postern of the palace; and they never stinted wayfaring by day
and by night, until they reached a tree a middle of a meadow hard by a
spring of sweet water on the shore of the salt sea. Both drank of it
and sat down to take their rest; and when an hour of the day had gone
by: lo! they heard a mighty roar and uproar in the middle of the main
as though the heavens were falling upon the earth; and the sea brake
with waves before them, and from it towered a black pillar, which grew
and grew till it rose skywards and began making for that meadow. Seeing
it, they waxed fearful exceedingly and climbed to the top of the tree,
which was a lofty; whence they gazed to see what might be the matter.
And behold, it was a Jinni,[FN#12] huge of height and burly of breast
and bulk, broad of brow and black of blee, bearing on his head a coffer
of crystal. He strode to land, wading through the deep, and coming to
the tree whereupon were the two Kings, seated himself beneath it. He
then set down the coffer on its bottom and out it drew a casket, with
seven padlocks of steel, which he unlocked with seven keys of steel he
took from beside his thigh, and out of it a young lady to come was
seen, white-skinned and of winsomest mien, of stature fine and thin,
and bright as though a moon of the fourteenth night she had been, or
the sun raining lively sheen. Even so the poet Utayyah hath excellently
said:—

She rose like the morn as she shone through the night * And she gilded
the grove with her gracious sight:
From her radiance the sun taketh increase when * She unveileth and
shameth the moonshine bright.
Bow down all beings between her hands * As she showeth charms with her
veil undight.
And she floodeth cities[FN#13] with torrent tears * When she flasheth
her look of leven-light.


The Jinni seated her under the tree by his side and looking at her
said, "O choicest love of this heart of mine! O dame of noblest line,
whom I snatched away on thy bride night that none might prevent me
taking thy maidenhead or tumble thee before I did, and whom none save
myself hath loved or hath enjoyed: O my sweetheart! I would lief sleep
a little while." He then laid his head upon the lady's thighs; and,
stretching out his legs which extended down to the sea, slept and
snored and snarked like the roll of thunder. Presently she raised her
head towards the tree top and saw the two Kings perched near the
summit; then she softly lifted off her lap the Jinni's pate which she
was tired of supporting and placed it upon the ground; then standing
upright under the tree signed to the Kings, "Come ye down, ye two, and
fear naught from this Ifrit."[FN#14] They were in a terrible fright
when they found that she had seen them and answered her in the same
manner, "Allah upon thee[FN#15] and by thy modesty, O lady, excuse us
from coming down!" But she rejoined by saying, "Allah upon you both,
that ye come down forthright, and if ye come not, I will rouse upon you
my husband, this Ifrit, and he shall do you to die by the illest of
deaths;" and she continued making signals to them. So, being afraid,
they came down to her and she rose be fore them and said, "Stroke me a
strong stroke, without stay or delay, otherwise will I arouse and set
upon you this Ifrit who shall slay you straightway." They said to her,
"O our lady, we conjure thee by Allah, let us off this work, for we are
fugitives from such and in extreme dread and terror of this thy
husband. How then can we do it in such a way as thou desirest"?" "Leave
this talk: it needs must be so;" quoth she, and she swore them by
Him[FN#16] who raised the skies on high, without prop or pillar, that,
if they worked not her will, she would cause them to be slain and cast
into the sea. Whereupon out of fear King Shahryar said to King Shah
Zaman, "O my brother, do thou what she biddeth thee do;" but he
replied, "I will not do it till thou do it before I do." And they began
disputing about futtering her. Then quoth she to the twain, "How is it
I see you disputing and demurring; if ye do not come forward like men
and do the deed of kind ye two, I will arouse upon you the Ifrit." At
this, by reason of their sore dread of the Jinni, both did by her what
she bade them do; and, when they had dismounted from her, she said,
"Well done!" She then took from her pocket a purse and drew out a
knotted string, whereon were strung five hundred and seventy[FN#17]
seal rings, and asked, "Know ye what be these?" They answered her
saying, "We know not!" Then quoth she; "These be the signets of five
hundred and seventy men who have all futtered me upon the horns of this
foul, this foolish, this filthy Ifrit; so give me also your two seal
rings, ye pair of brothers." When they had drawn their two rings from
their hands and given them to her, she said to them, "Of a truth this
Ifrit bore me off on my bride night, and put me into a casket and set
the casket in a coffer and to the coffer he affixed seven strong
padlocks of steel and deposited me on the deep bottom of the sea that
raves, dashing and clashing with waves; and guarded me so that I might
remain chaste and honest, quotha! that none save himself might have
connexion with me. But I have lain under as many of my kind as I
please, and this wretched Jinni wotteth not that Des tiny may not be
averted nor hindered by aught, and that whatso woman willeth the same
she fulfilleth however man nilleth. Even so saith one of them.—

Rely not on women; * Trust not to their hearts,
Whose joys and whose sorrows * Are hung to their parts!
Lying love they will swear thee * Whence guile ne'er departs:
Take Yusuf[FN#18] for sample * 'Ware sleights and 'ware smarts!
Iblis[FN#19] ousted Adam * (See ye not?) thro' their arts.


And another saith:—

Stint thy blame, man! 'Twill drive to a passion without bound; * My
fault is not so heavy as fault in it hast found.
If true lover I become, then to me there cometh not * Save what
happened unto many in the bygone stound.
For wonderful is he and right worthy of our praise * Who fromwiles of
female wits kept him safe and kept him sound."


Hearing these words they marvelled with exceeding marvel, and she went
from them to the Ifrit and, taking up his head on her thigh as before,
said to them softly, "Now wend your ways and bear yourselves beyond the
bounds of his malice." So they fared forth saying either to other,
"Allah! Allah!" and, "There be no Majesty and there be no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great; and with Him we seek refuge from
women's malice and sleight, for of a truth it hath no mate in might.
Consider, O my brother, the ways of this marvellous lady with an Ifrit
who is so much more powerful than we are. Now since there hath happened
to him a greater mishap than that which befel us and which should bear
us abundant consolation, so return we to our countries and capitals,
and let us decide never to intermarry with womankind and presently we
will show them what will be our action." Thereupon they rode back to
the tents of King Shahryar, which they reached on the morning of the
third day; and, having mustered the Wazirs and Emirs, the Chamberlains
and high officials, he gave a robe of honour to his Viceroy and issued
orders for an immediate return to the city. There he sat him upon his
throne and sending for the Chief Minister, the father of the two
damsels who (Inshallah!) will presently be mentioned, he said, "I
command thee to take my wife and smite her to death; for she hath
broken her plight and her faith." So he carried her to the place of
execution and did her die. Then King Shahryar took brand in hand and
repairing to the Serraglio slew all the concubines and their
Mamelukes.[FN#20] He also sware himself by a binding oath that whatever
wife he married he would abate her maidenhead at night and slay her
next morning to make sure of his honour; "For," said he, "there never
was nor is there one chaste woman upon the face of earth." Then Shah
Zaman prayed for permission to fare homewards; and he went forth
equipped and escorted and travelled till he reached his own country.
Mean while Shahryar commanded his Wazir to bring him the bride of the
night that he might go in to her; so he produced a most beautiful girl,
the daughter of one of the Emirs and the King went in unto her at
eventide and when morning dawned he bade his Minister strike off her
head; and the Wazir did accordingly for fear of the Sultan. On this
wise he continued for the space of three years; marrying a maiden every
night and killing her the next morning, till folk raised an outcry
against him and cursed him, praying Allah utterly to destroy him and
his rule; and women made an uproar and mothers wept and parents fled
with their daughters till there remained not in the city a young person
fit for carnal copulation. Presently the King ordered his Chief Wazir,
the same who was charged with the executions, to bring him a virgin as
was his wont; and the Minister went forth and searched and found none;
so he returned home in sorrow and anxiety fearing for his life from the
King. Now he had two daughters, Shahrazad and Dunyazad hight,[FN#21] of
whom the elder had perused the books, annals and legends of preceding
Kings, and the stories, examples and instances of by gone men and
things; indeed it was said that she had collected a thousand books of
histories relating to antique races and departed rulers. She had
perused the works of the poets and knew them by heart; she had studied
philosophy and the sciences, arts and accomplishments; and she was
pleasant and polite, wise and witty, well read and well bred. Now on
that day she said to her father, "Why do I see thee thus changed and
laden with cark and care? Concerning this matter quoth one of the
poets.—

Tell whoso hath sorrow * Grief never shall last:
E'en as joy hath no morrow * So woe shall go past."


When the Wazir heard from his daughter these words he related to her,
from first to last, all that had happened between him and the King.
Thereupon said she, "By Allah, O my father, how long shall this
slaughter of women endure? Shall I tell thee what is in my mind in
order to save both sides from destruction?" "Say on, O my daughter,"
quoth he, and quoth she, "I wish thou wouldst give me in marriage to
this King Shahryar; either I shall live or I shall be a ransom for the
virgin daughters of Moslems and the cause of their deliverance from his
hands and thine."[FN#22] "Allah upon thee!" cried he in wrath exceeding
that lacked no feeding, "O scanty of wit, expose not thy life to such
peril! How durst thou address me in words so wide from wisdom and un
far from foolishness? Know that one who lacketh experience in worldly
matters readily falleth into misfortune; and whoso considereth not the
end keepeth not the world to friend, and the vulgar say:—I was lying at
mine ease: nought but my officiousness brought me unease." "Needs must
thou," she broke in, "make me a doer of this good deed, and let him
kill me an he will: I shall only die a ransom for others." "O my
daughter," asked he, "and how shall that profit thee when thou shalt
have thrown away thy life?" and she answered, "O my father it must be,
come of it what will!" The Wazir was again moved to fury and blamed and
reproached her, ending with, "In very deed—I fear lest the same befal
thee which befel the Bull and the Ass with the Husband man." "And
what," asked she, "befel them, O my father?" Whereupon the Wazir began
the


Tale of the Bull[FN#23] and the Ass.


Know, O my daughter, that there was once a merchant who owned much
money and many men, and who was rich in cattle and camels; he had also
a wife and family and he dwelt in the country, being experienced in
husbandry and devoted to agriculture. Now Allah Most High had endowed
him with understanding the tongues of beasts and birds of every kind,
but under pain of death if he divulged the gift to any. So he kept it
secret for very fear. He had in his cow house a Bull and an Ass each
tethered in his own stall one hard by the other. As the merchant was
sitting near hand one day with his servants and his children were
playing about him, he heard the Bull say to the Ass, "Hail and health
to thee O Father of Waking![FN#24] for that thou enjoyest rest and good
ministering; all under thee is clean swept and fresh sprinkled; men
wait upon thee and feed thee, and thy provaunt is sifted barley and thy
drink pure spring water, while I (unhappy creature!) am led forth in
the middle of the night, when they set on my neck the plough and a
something called Yoke; and I tire at cleaving the earth from dawn of
day till set of sun. I am forced to do more than I can and to bear all
manner of ill treatment from night to night; after which they take me
back with my sides torn, my neck flayed, my legs aching and mine
eyelids sored with tears. Then they shut me up in the byre and throw me
beans and crushed straw,[FN#25] mixed with dirt and chaff; and I lie in
dung and filth and foul stinks through the livelong night. But thou art
ever in a place swept and sprinkled and cleansed, and thou art always
lying at ease, save when it happens (and seldom enough!) that the
master hath some business, when he mounts thee and rides thee to town
and returns with thee forthright. So it happens that I am toiling and
distrest while thou takest thine ease and thy rest; thou sleepest while
I am sleepless; I hunger still while thou eatest thy fill, and I win
contempt while thou winnest good will." When the Bull ceased speaking,
the Ass turned towards him and said, "O Broad o' Brow,[FN#26] O thou
lost one! he lied not who dubbed thee Bull head, for thou, O father of
a Bull, hast neither forethought nor contrivance; thou art the simplest
of simpletons,[FN#27] and thou knowest naught of good advisers. Hast
thou not heard the saying of the wise:—

For others these hardships and labours I bear * And theirs is the
pleasure and mine is the care;
As the bleacher who blacketh his brow in the sun * To whiten the
raiment which other men wear.[FN#28]


But thou, O fool, art full of zeal and thou toilest and moilest before
the master; and thou tearest and wearest and slayest thy self for the
comfort of another. Hast thou never heard the saw that saith, None to
guide and from the way go wide? Thou wendest forth at the call to dawn
prayer and thou returnest not till sundown; and through the livelong
day thou endurest all manner hardships; to wit, beating and belabouring
and bad language. Now hearken to me, Sir Bull! when they tie thee to
thy stinking manger, thou pawest the ground with thy forehand and
lashest out with thy hind hoofs and pushest with thy horns and
bellowest aloud, so they deem thee contented. And when they throw thee
thy fodder thou fallest on it with greed and hastenest to line thy fair
fat paunch. But if thou accept my advice it will be better for thee and
thou wilt lead an easier life even than mine. When thou goest a field
and they lay the thing called Yoke on thy neck, lie down and rise not
again though haply they swinge thee; and, if thou rise, lie down a
second time; and when they bring thee home and offer thee thy beans,
fall backwards and only sniff at thy meat and withdraw thee and taste
it not, and be satis fied with thy crushed straw and chaff; and on this
wise feign thou art sick, and cease not doing thus for a day or two
days or even three days, so shalt thou have rest from toil and moil."
When the Bull heard these words he knew the Ass to be his friend and
thanked him, saying, "Right is thy rede;" and prayed that all blessings
might requite him, and cried, "O Father Wakener![FN#29] thou hast made
up for my failings." (Now[FN#30] the merchant, O my daughter,
understood all that passed between them.) Next day the driver took the
Bull, and settling the plough on his neck,[FN#31] made him work as
wont; but the Bull began to shirk his ploughing, according to the
advice of the Ass, and the ploughman drubbed him till he broke the yoke
and made off; but the man caught him up and leathered him till he
despaired of his life. Not the less, however, would he do nothing but
stand still and drop down till the evening. Then the herd led him home
and stabled him in his stall: but he drew back from his manger and
neither stamped nor ramped nor butted nor bellowed as he was wont to
do; whereat the man wondered. He brought him the beans and husks, but
he sniffed at them and left them and lay down as far from them as he
could and passed the whole night fasting. The peasant came next
morning; and, seeing the manger full of beans, the crushed straw
untasted and the ox lying on his back in sorriest plight, with legs
outstretched and swollen belly, he was concerned for him, and said to
himself, "By Allah, he hath assuredly sickened and this is the cause
why he would not plough yesterday." Then he went to the merchant and
reported, "O my master, the Bull is ailing; he refused his fodder last
night; nay more, he hath not tasted a scrap of it this morning." Now
the merchant farmer understood what all this meant, because he had
overheard the talk between the Bull and the Ass, so quoth he, "Take
that rascal donkey, and set the yoke on his neck, and bind him to the
plough and make him do Bull's work." Thereupon the ploughman took the
Ass, and worked him through the livelong day at the Bull's task; and,
when he failed for weakness, he made him eat stick till his ribs were
sore and his sides were sunken and his neck was flayed by the yoke; and
when he came home in the evening he could hardly drag his limbs along,
either forehand or hind legs. But as for the Bull, he had passed the
day lying at full length and had eaten his fodder with an excellent
appetite, and he ceased not calling down blessings on the Ass for his
good advice, unknowing what had come to him on his account. So when
night set in and the Ass returned to the byre the Bull rose up before
him in honour, and said, "May good tidings gladden thy heart, O Father
Wakener! through thee I have rested all this day and I have eaten my
meat in peace and quiet." But the Ass returned no reply, for wrath and
heart burning and fatigue and the beating he had gotten; and he
repented with the most grievous of repentance; and quoth he to himself:
"This cometh of my folly in giving good counsel; as the saw saith, I
was in joy and gladness, nought save my officiousness brought me this
sadness. But I will bear in mind my innate worth and the nobility of my
nature; for what saith the poet?

Shall the beautiful hue of the Basil[FN#32] fail * Tho' the beetle's
foot o'er the Basil crawl?
And though spider and fly be its denizens * Shall disgrace attach to
the royal hall?
The cowrie,[FN#33] I ken, shall have currency * But the pearl's clear
drop, shall its value fall?


And now I must take thought and put a trick upon him and return him to
his place, else I die." Then he went aweary to his manger, while the
Bull thanked him and blessed him. And even so, O my daughter, said the
Wazir, thou wilt die for lack of wits; therefore sit thee still and say
naught and expose not thy life to such stress; for, by Allah, I offer
thee the best advice, which cometh of my affection and kindly
solicitude for thee." "O my father," she answered, "needs must I go up
to this King and be married to him." Quoth he, "Do not this deed;" and
quoth she, "Of a truth I will:" whereat he rejoined, "If thou be not
silent and bide still, I will do with thee even what the merchant did
with his wife." "And what did he?" asked she. "Know then, answered the
Wazir, that after the return of the Ass the merchant came out on the
terrace roof with his wife and family, for it was a moonlit night and
the moon at its full. Now the ter race overlooked the cowhouse and
presently, as he sat there with his children playing about him, the
trader heard the Ass say to the Bull, "Tell me, O Father Broad o' Brow,
what thou purposest to do to morrow?" The Bull answered, "What but
continue to follow thy counsel, O Aliboron? Indeed it was as good as
good could be and it hath given me rest and repose; nor will I now
depart from it one tittle: so, when they bring me my meat, I will
refuse it and blow out my belly and counterfeit crank." The Ass shook
his head and said, "Beware of so doing, O Father of a Bull!" The Bull
asked, "Why," and the Ass answered, "Know that I am about to give thee
the best of counsel, for verily I heard our owner say to the herd, If
the Bull rise not from his place to do his work this morning and if he
retire from his fodder this day, make him over to the butcher that he
may slaughter him and give his flesh to the poor, and fashion a bit of
leather[FN#34] from his hide. Now I fear for thee on account of this.
So take my advice ere a calamity befal thee; and when they bring thee
thy fodder eat it and rise up and bellow and paw the ground, or our
master will assuredly slay thee: and peace be with thee!" Thereupon the
Bull arose and lowed aloud and thanked the Ass, and said, "To morrow I
will readily go forth with them;" and he at once ate up all his meat
and even licked the manger. (All this took place and the owner was
listening to their talk.) Next morning the trader and his wife went to
the Bull's crib and sat down, and the driver came and led forth the
Bull who, seeing his owner, whisked his tail and brake wind, and
frisked about so lustily that the merchant laughed a loud laugh and
kept laughing till he fell on his back. His wife asked him, "Whereat
laughest thou with such loud laughter as this?"; and he answered her,
"I laughed at a secret something which I have heard and seen but cannot
say lest I die my death." She returned, "Perforce thou must discover it
to me, and disclose the cause of thy laughing even if thou come by thy
death!" But he rejoined, "I cannot reveal what beasts and birds say in
their lingo for fear I die." Then quoth she, "By Allah, thou liest!
this is a mere pretext: thou laughest at none save me, and now thou
wouldest hide somewhat from me. But by the Lord of the Heavens! an thou
disclose not the cause I will no longer cohabit with thee: I will leave
thee at once." And she sat down and cried. Whereupon quoth the
merchant, "Woe betide thee! what means thy weeping? Fear Allah and
leave these words and query me no more questions." "Needs must thou
tell me the cause of that laugh," said she, and he replied, "Thou
wottest that when I prayed Allah to vouchsafe me understanding of the
tongues of beasts and birds, I made a vow never to disclose the secret
to any under pain of dying on the spot." "No matter," cried she, "tell
me what secret passed between the Bull and the Ass and die this very
hour an thou be so minded;" and she ceased not to importune him till he
was worn out and clean distraught. So at last he said, "Summon thy
father and thy mother and our kith and kin and sundry of our
neighbours," which she did; and he sent for the Kazi[FN#35] and his
assessors, intending to make his will and reveal to her his secret and
die the death; for he loved her with love exceeding because she was his
cousin, the daughter of his father's brother, and the mother of his
children, and he had lived with her a life of an hundred and twenty
years. Then, having assembled all the family and the folk of his
neighbourhood, he said to them, "By me there hangeth a strange story,
and 'tis such that if I discover the secret to any, I am a dead man."
Therefore quoth every one of those present to the woman, "Allah upon
thee, leave this sinful obstinacy and recognise the right of this
matter, lest haply thy husband and the father of thy children die." But
she rejoined, "I will not turn from it till he tell me, even though he
come by his death." So they ceased to urge her; and the trader rose
from amongst them and repaired to an out-house to perform
Wuzu-ablution,[FN#36] and he purposed thereafter to return and to tell
them his secret and to die. Now, daughter Shahrazad, that mer chant had
in his out-houses some fifty hens under one cock, and whilst making
ready to farewell his folk he heard one of his many farm dogs thus
address in his own tongue the Cock, who was flapping his wings and
crowing lustily and jumping from one hen's back to another and treading
all in turn, saying "O Chanticleer! how mean is thy wit and how
shameless is thy conduct! Be he disappointed who brought thee
up![FN#37] Art thou not ashamed of thy doings on such a day as this!"
"And what," asked the Rooster, "hath occurred this day?" when the Dog
answered, "Dost thou not know that our master is this day making ready
for his death? His wife is resolved that he shall disclose the secret
taught to him by Allah, and the moment he so doeth he shall surely die.
We dogs are all a mourning; but thou clappest thy wings and clarionest
thy loudest and treadest hen after hen. Is this an hour for pastime and
pleasuring? Art thou not ashamed of thyself?"[FN#38] "Then by Allah,"
quoth the Cock, "is our master a lack wit and a man scanty of sense: if
he cannot manage matters with a single wife, his life is not worth
prolonging. Now I have some fifty Dame Partlets; and I please this and
provoke that and starve one and stuff another; and through my good
governance they are all well under my control. This our master
pretendeth to wit and wisdom, and he hath but one wife, and yet knoweth
not how to manage her." Asked the Dog, "What then, O Cock, should the
master do to win clear of his strait?" "He should arise forthright,"
answered the Cock, "and take some twigs from yon mulberry tree and give
her a regular back basting and rib roasting till she cry:—I repent, O
my lord! I will never ask thee a question as long as I live! Then let
him beat her once more and soundly, and when he shall have done this he
shall sleep free from care and enjoy life. But this master of ours owns
neither sense nor judgment." "Now, daughter Shahrazad," continued the
Wazir, "I will do to thee as did that husband to that wife." Said
Shahrazad, "And what did he do?" He replied, "When the merchant heard
the wise words spoken by his Cock to his Dog, he arose in haste and
sought his wife's chamber, after cutting for her some mulberry twigs
and hiding them there; and then he called to her, "Come into the closet
that I may tell thee the secret while no one seeth me and then die."
She entered with him and he locked the door and came down upon her with
so sound a beating of back and shoulders, ribs, arms and legs, saying
the while, "Wilt thou ever be asking questions about what concerneth
thee not?" that she was well nigh senseless. Presently she cried out,
"I am of the repentant! By Allah, I will ask thee no more questions,
and indeed I repent sincerely and wholesomely." Then she kissed his
hand and feet and he led her out of the room submissive as a wife
should be. Her parents and all the company rejoiced and sadness and
mourning were changed into joy and gladness. Thus the merchant learnt
family discipline from his Cock and he and his wife lived together the
happiest of lives until death. And thou also, O my daughter!" continued
the Wazir, "Unless thou turn from this matter I will do by thee what
that trader did to his wife." But she answered him with much decision,
"I will never desist, O my father, nor shall this tale change my
purpose. Leave such talk and tattle. I will not listen to thy words
and, if thou deny me, I will marry myself to him despite the nose of
thee. And first I will go up to the King myself and alone and I will
say to him:—I prayed my father to wive me with thee, but he refused
being resolved to disappoint his lord, grudging the like of me to the
like of thee." Her father asked, "Must this needs be?" and she
answered, "Even so." Hereupon the Wazir being weary of lamenting and
contending, persuading and dissuading her, all to no purpose, went up
to King Shahryar and after blessing him and kissing the ground before
him, told him all about his dispute with his daughter from first to
last and how he designed to bring her to him that night. The King
wondered with exceeding wonder; for he had made an especial exception
of the Wazir's daughter, and said to him, "O most faithful of
Counsellors, how is this? Thou wottest that I have sworn by the Raiser
of the Heavens that after I have gone in to her this night I shall say
to thee on the morrow's morning:—Take her and slay her! and, if thou
slay her not, I will slay thee in her stead without fail." "Allah guide
thee to glory and lengthen thy life, O King of the age," answered the
Wazir, "it is she that hath so determined: all this have I told her and
more; but she will not hearken to me and she persisteth in passing this
coming night with the King's Majesty." So Shahryar rejoiced greatly and
said, "'Tis well; go get her ready and this night bring her to me." The
Wazir returned to his daughter and reported to her the command saying,
"Allah make not thy father desolate by thy loss!" But Shahrazad
rejoiced with exceeding joy and gat ready all she required and said to
her younger sister, Dunyazad, "Note well what directions I entrust to
thee! When I have gone into the King I will send for thee and when thou
comest to me and seest that he hath had his carnal will of me, do thou
say to me:—O my sister, an thou be not sleepy, relate to me some new
story, delectable and delightsome, the better to speed our waking
hours;" and I will tell thee a tale which shall be our deliverance, if
so Allah please, and which shall turn the King from his blood thirsty
custom." Dunyazad answered "With love and gladness." So when it was
night their father the Wazir carried Shahrazad to the King who was
gladdened at the sight and asked, "Hast thou brought me my need?" and
he answered, "I have." But when the King took her to his bed and fell
to toying with her and wished to go in to her she wept; which made him
ask, "What aileth thee?" She replied, "O King of the age, I have a
younger sister and lief would I take leave of her this night before I
see the dawn." So he sent at once for Dunyazad and she came and kissed
the ground between his hands, when he permitted her to take her seat
near the foot of the couch. Then the King arose and did away with his
bride's maidenhead and the three fell asleep. But when it was midnight
Shahrazad awoke and signalled to her sister Dunyazad who sat up and
said, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, recite to us some new story,
delightsome and delectable, wherewith to while away the waking hours of
our latter night."[FN#39] "With joy and goodly gree," answered
Shahrazad, "if this pious and auspicious King permit me." "Tell on,"
quoth the King who chanced to be sleepless and restless and therefore
was pleased with the prospect of hearing her story. So Shahrazad
rejoiced; and thus, on the first night of the Thousand Nights and a
Night, she began with the


TALE OF THE TRADER AND THE JINNI.


It is related, O auspicious King, that there was a merchant of the
merchants who had much wealth, and business in various cities. Now on a
day he mounted horse and went forth to recover monies in certain towns,
and the heat sore oppressed him; so he sat beneath a tree and, putting
his hand into his saddle bags, took thence some broken bread and dry
dates and began to break his fast. When he had ended eating the dates
he threw away the stones with force and lo! an Ifrit appeared, huge of
stature and brandishing a drawn sword, wherewith he approached the
merchant and said, "Stand up that I may slay thee, even as thou slewest
my son!" Asked the merchant, "How have I slain thy son?" and he
answered, "When thou atest dates and threwest away the stones they
struck my son full in the breast as he was walking by, so that he died
forthwith."[FN#40] Quoth the merchant, "Verily from Allah we proceeded
and unto Allah are we returning. There is no Majesty, and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! If I slew thy son, I slew
him by chance medley. I pray thee now pardon me." Rejoined the Jinni,
"There is no help but I must slay thee." Then he seized him and dragged
him along and, casting him to the earth, raised the sword to strike
him; whereupon the merchant wept, and said, "I commit my case to
Allah," and began repeating these couplets:—

Containeth Time a twain of days, this of blessing that of bane * And
holdeth Life a twain of halves, this of pleasure that of pain.
See'st not when blows the hurricane, sweeping stark and striking strong
* None save the forest giant feels the suffering of the strain?
How many trees earth nourisheth of the dry and of the green * Yet none
but those which bear the fruits for cast of stone complain.
See'st not how corpses rise and float on the surface of the tide *
While pearls o'price lie hidden in the deepest of the main!
In Heaven are unnumbered the many of the stars * Yet ne'er a star but
Sun and Moon by eclipse is overta'en.
Well judgedst thou the days that saw thy faring sound and well * And
countedst not the pangs and pain whereof Fate is ever fain.
The nights have kept thee safe and the safety brought thee pride * But
bliss and blessings of the night are 'genderers of bane!


When the merchant ceased repeating his verses the Jinni said to him,
"Cut thy words short, by Allah! needs must I slay thee." But the
merchant spake him thus, "Know, O thou Ifrit, that I have debts due to
me and much wealth and children and a wife and many pledges in hand; so
permit me to go home and discharge to every claimant his claim; and I
will come back to thee at the head of the new year. Allah be my
testimony and surety that I will return to thee; and then thou mayest
do with me as thou wilt and Allah is witness to what I say." The Jinni
took sure promise of him and let him go; so he returned to his own city
and transacted his business and rendered to all men their dues and
after informing his wife and children of what had betided him, he
appointed a guardian and dwelt with them for a full year. Then he
arose, and made the Wuzu ablution to purify himself before death and
took his shroud under his arm and bade farewell to his people, his
neighbours and all his kith and kin, and went forth despite his own
nose.[FN#41] They then began weeping and wailing and beating their
breasts over him; but he travelled until he arrived at the same garden,
and the day of his arrival was the head of the New Year. As he sat
weeping over what had befallen him, behold, a Shaykh,[FN#42] a very
ancient man, drew near leading a chained gazelle; and he saluted that
merchant and wishing him long life said, "What is the cause of thy
sitting in this place and thou alone and this be a resort of evil
spirits?" The merchant related to him what had come to pass with the
Ifrit, and the old man, the owner of the gazelle, wondered and said,
"By Allah, O brother, thy faith is none other than exceeding faith and
thy story right strange; were it graven with gravers on the eye
corners, it were a warner to whoso would be warned." Then seating
himself near the merchant he said, "By Allah, O my brother, I will not
leave thee until I see what may come to pass with thee and this Ifrit."
And presently as he sat and the two were at talk the merchant began to
feel fear and terror and exceeding grief and sorrow beyond relief and
ever growing care and extreme despair. And the owner of the gazelle was
hard by his side; when behold, a second Shaykh approached them, and
with him were two dogs both of greyhound breed and both black. The
second old man after saluting them with the salam, also asked them of
their tidings and said "What causeth you to sit in this place, a
dwelling of the Jann?"[FN#43] So they told him the tale from beginning
to end, and their stay there had not lasted long before there came up a
third Shaykh, and with him a she mule of bright bay coat; and he
saluted them and asked them why they were seated in that place. So they
told him the story from first to last: and of no avail, O my master, is
a twice told tale! There he sat down with them, and lo! a dust cloud
advanced and a mighty sand-devil appeared amidmost of the waste.
Presently the cloud opened and behold, within it was that Jinni hending
in hand a drawn sword, while his eyes were shooting fire sparks of
rage. He came up to them and, haling away the merchant from among them,
cried to him, "Arise that I may slay thee, as thou slewest my son, the
life stuff of my liver."[FN#44] The merchant wailed and wept, and the
three old men began sighing and crying and weeping and wailing with
their companion. Presently the first old man (the owner of the gazelle)
came out from among them and kissed the hand of the Ifrit and said, "O
Jinni, thou Crown of the Kings of the Jann! were I to tell thee the