THE TALE OF THE THREE APPLES


They relate, O King of the age and lord of the time and of these days,
that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid summoned his Wazir Ja'afar one night
and said to him, 'I desire to go down into the city and question the
common folk concerning the conduct of those charged with its
governance; and those of whom they complain we will depose from office
and those whom they commend we will promote." Quoth Ja'afar,
"Hearkening and obedience!" So the Caliph went down with Ja'afar and
Eunuch Masrur to the town and walked about the streets and markets and,
as they were threading a narrow alley, they came upon a very old man
with a fishing-net and crate to carry small fish on his head, and in
his hand a staff; and, as he walked at a leisurely pace, he repeated
these lines:—

"They say me: —Thou shinest a light to mankind * With thy lore as the
night which the Moon doth uplight!
I answer, "A truce to your jests and your gibes; * Without luck what is
learning?—a poor-devil wight!
If they take me to pawn with my lore in my pouch, * With my volumes to
read and my ink-case to write,
For one day's provision they never could pledge me; * As likely on
Doomsday to draw bill at sight:"
How poorly, indeed, doth it fare wi' the poor, * With his pauper
existence and beggarly plight:
In summer he faileth provision to find; * In winter the fire-pot's his
only delight:
The street-dogs with bite and with bark to him rise, * And each losel
receives him with bark and with bite:
If he lift up his voice and complain of his wrong, * None pities or
heeds him, however he's right;
And when sorrows and evils like these he must brave * His happiest
homestead were down in the grave."


When the Caliph heard his verses he said to Ja'afar, "See this poor man
and note his verses, for surely they point to his necessities." Then he
accosted him and asked, "O Shaykh, what be thine occupation?" and the
poor man answered, "O my lord, I am a fisherman with a family to keep
and I have been out between mid-day and this time; and not a thing hath
Allah made my portion wherewithal to feed my family. I cannot even pawn
myself to buy them a supper and I hate and disgust my life and I hanker
after death." Quoth the Caliph, "Say me, wilt thou return with us to
Tigris' bank and cast thy net on my luck, and whatsoever turneth up I
will buy of thee for an hundred gold pieces?" The man rejoiced when he
heard these words and said, "On my head be it! I will go back with
you;" and, returning with them river-wards, made a cast and waited a
while; then he hauled in the rope and dragged the net ashore and there
appeared in it a chest padlocked and heavy. The Caliph examined it and
lifted it finding it weighty; so he gave the fisherman two hundred
dinars and sent him about his business; whilst Masrur, aided by the
Caliph, carried the chest to the palace and set it down and lighted the
candles. Ja'afar and Masrur then broke it open and found therein a
basket of palm-leaves corded with red worsted. This they cut open and
saw within it a piece of carpet which they lifted out, and under it was
a woman's mantilla folded in four, which they pulled out; and at the
bottom of the chest they came upon a young lady, fair as a silver
ingot, slain and cut into nineteen pieces. When the Caliph looked upon
her he cried, "Alas!" and tears ran down his cheeks and turning to
Ja'afar he said, "O dog of Wazirs, [FN#354] shall folk be murdered in
our reign and be cast into the river to be a burden and a
responsibility for us on the Day of Doom? By Allah, we must avenge this
woman on her murderer and he shall be made die the worst of deaths!"
And presently he added, " Now, as surely as we are descended from the
Sons of Abbas, [FN#355] if thou bring us not him who slew her, that we
do her justice on him, I will hang thee at the gate of my palace, thee
and forty of thy kith and kin by thy side." And the: Caliph was wroth
with exceeding rage. Quoth Ja'afar, "Grant me three days' delay;" and
quoth the Caliph, "We grant thee this." So Ja'afar went out from before
him and returned to his own house, full of sorrow and saying to
himself, "How shall I find him who murdered this damsel, that I may
bring him before the Caliph? If I bring other than the murderer, it
will be laid to my charge by the Lord: in very sooth I wot not what to
do." He kept his house three days and on the fourth day the Caliph sent
one of the Chamberlains for him and, as he came into the presence,
asked him, "Where is the murderer of the damsel?" to which answered
Ja'afar, "O Commander of the Faithful, am I inspector of " murdered
folk that I should ken who killed her?" The Caliph was furious at his
answer and bade hang him before the palace-gate and commanded that a
crier cry through the streets of Baghdad, "Whoso would see the hanging
of Ja'afar, the Barmaki, Wazir of the Caliph, with forty of the
Barmecides, [FN#356] his cousins and kinsmen, before the palace-gate,
let him come and let him look!" The people flocked out from all the
quarters of the city to witness the execution of Ja'afar and his
kinsmen, not knowing the cause. Then they set up the gallows and made
Ja'afar and the others stand underneath in readiness for execution, but
whilst every eye was looking for the Caliph's signal, and the crowd
wept for Ja'afar and his cousins of the Barmecides, lo and behold! a
young man fair of face and neat of dress and of favour like the moon
raining light, with eyes black and bright, and brow flower-white, and
cheeks red as rose and young down where the beard grows, and a mole
like a grain of ambergris, pushed his way through the people till he
stood immediately before the Wazir and said to him, "Safety to thee
from this strait, O Prince of the Emirs and Asylum of the poor! I am
the man who slew the woman ye found in the chest, so hang me for her
and do her justice on me!" When Ja'afar heard the youth's confession he
rejoiced at his own deliverance. but grieved and sorrowed for the fair
youth; and whilst they were yet talking behold, another man well
stricken in years pressed forwards through the people and thrust his
way amid the populace till he came to Ja'afar and the youth, whom he
saluted saying, "Ho thou the Wazir and Prince sans-peer! believe not
the words of this youth. Of a surety none murdered the damsel but I;
take her wreak on me this moment; for, an thou do not thus, I will
require it of thee before Almighty Allah." Then quoth the young man, "O
Wazir, this is an old man in his dotage who wotteth not whatso he saith
ever, and I am he who murdered her, so do thou avenge her on me!" Quoth
the old man, "O my son, thou art young and desirest the joys of the
world and I am old and weary and surfeited with the world: I will offer
my life as a ransom for thee and for the Wazir and his cousins. No one
murdered the damsel but I, so Allah upon thee, make haste to hang me,
for no life is left in me now that hers is gone." The Wazir marvelled
much at all this strangeness and, taking the young man and the old man,
carried them before the Caliph, where, after kissing the ground seven
times between his hands, he said, "O Commander of the Faithful, I bring
thee the murderer of the damsel!" "Where is he?" asked the Caliph and
Ja'afar answered, "This young man saith, I am the murderer, and this
old man giving him the lie saith, I am the murderer, and behold, here
are the twain standing before thee." The Caliph looked at the old man
and the young man and asked, "Which of you killed the girl?" The young
man replied, "No one slew her save I;" and the old man answered,
"Indeed none killed her but myself." Then said the Caliph to Ja'afar,
"Take the twain and hang them both;" but Ja'afar rejoined, "Since one
of them was the murderer, to hang the other were mere
injustice."[FN#357] "By Him who raised the firmament and dispread the
earth like a carpet," cried the youth, "I am he who slew the damsel;"
and he went on to describe the manner of her murder and the basket, the
mantilla and the bit of carpet, in fact all that the Caliph had found
upon her. So the Caliph was certified that the young man was the
murderer; whereat he wondered and asked him, 'What was the cause of thy
wrongfully doing this damsel to die and what made thee confess the
murder without the bastinado, and what brought thee here to yield up
thy life, and what made thee say Do her wreak upon me?" The youth
answered, "Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that this woman was my
wife and the mother of my children; also my first cousin and the
daughter of my paternal uncle, this old man who is my father's own
brother. When I married her she was a maid [FN#358] and Allah blessed
me with three male children by her; she loved me and served me and I
saw no evil in her, for I also loved her with fondest love. Now on the
first day of this month she fell ill with grievous sickness and I
fetched in physicians to her; but recovery came to her little by
little. and, when I wished her to go to the Hammam-bath, she said,
"There is a something I long for before I go to the bath and I long for
it with an exceeding longing." To hear is to comply," said I. "And what
is it?" Quoth she, "I have a queasy craving for an apple, to smell it
and bite a bit of it." I replied, "Hadst thou a thousand longings I
would try to satisfy them!" So I went on the instant into the city and
sought for apples but could find none; yet, had they cost a gold piece
each, would I have bought them. I was vexed at this and went home and
said, "O daughter of my uncle. by Allah I can find none!" She was
distressed, being yet very weakly, and her weakness increased greatly
on her that night and I felt anxious and alarmed on her account. As
soon as morning dawned I went out again and made the round of the
gardens, one by one, but found no apples anywhere. At last there met me
an old gardener. of whom I asked about them and he answered, "O my son,
this fruit is a rarity with us and is not now to be found save in the
garden of the Commander of the Faithful at Bassorah, where the gardener
keepeth it for the Caliph's eating." I returned to my house troubled by
my ill-success; and my love for my wife and my affection moved me to
undertake the journey. So I gat me ready and set out and travelled
fifteen days and nights, going and coming, and brought her three apples
which I bought from the gardener for three dinars. But when I went in
to my wife and set them before her, she took no pleasure in them and
let them lie by her side; for her weakness and fever had increased on
her and her malady lasted without abating ten days, after which time
she began to recover health. So I left my house and betaking me to my
shop sat there buying and selling; and about midday behold, a great
ugly black slave, long as a lance and broad as a bench, passed by my
shop holding in hand one of the three apples wherewith he was playing.
Quoth I, "O my good slave, tell me whence thou tookest that apple, that
I may get the like of it?" He laughed and answered, "I got it from my
mistress, for I had been absent and on my return I found her lying ill
with three apples by her side, and she said to me, 'My horned wittol of
a husband made a journey for them to Bassorah and bought them for three
dinars.' So I ate and drank with her and took this one from her."
[FN#359] When I heard such words from the slave, O Commander of the
Faithful, the world grew black before my face, and I arose and locked
up my shop and went home beside myself for excess of rage. I looked for
the apples and finding only two of the three asked my wife, "O my
cousin, where is the third apple?"; and raising her head languidly she
answered, "I wot not, O son of my uncle, where 'tis gone!" This
convinced me that the slave had spoken the truth, so I took a knife and
coming behind her got upon her breast without a word said and cut her
throat. Then I hewed off her head and her limbs in pieces and, wrapping
her in her mantilla and a rag of carpet, hurriedly sewed up the whole
which I set in a chest and, locking it tight, loaded it on my he-mule
and threw it into the Tigris with my own hands. So Allah upon thee, O
Commander of the Faithful, make haste to hang me, as I fear lest she
appeal for vengeance on Resurrection Day. For, when I had thrown her
into the river and none knew aught of it, as I went back home I found
my eldest son crying and yet he knew naught of what I had done with his
mother. I asked him, "What hath made thee weep, my boy?" and he
answered, "I took one of the three apples which were by my mammy and
went down into the lane to play with my brethren when behold, a big
long black slave snatched it from my hand and said. 'Whence hadst thou
this?' Quoth I, 'My father travelled far for it, and brought it from
Bassorah for my mother who was ill and two other apples for which he
paid three ducats.' He took no heed of my words and I asked for the
apple a second and a third time, but he cuffed me and kicked me and
went off with it. I was afraid lest my mother should swinge me on
account of the apple, so for fear of her I went with my brother outside
the city and stayed there till evening closed in upon us; and indeed I
am in fear of her; and now by Allah, O my father, say nothing to her of
this or it may add to her ailment!" When I heard what-my child said I
knew that the slave was he who had foully slandered my wife, the
daughter of my uncle, and was certified that I had slain her wrong.
fully. So I wept with exceeding weeping and presently this old man, my
paternal uncle and her father, came in; and I told him what had
happened and he sat down by my side and wept and we ceased not weeping
till midnight. We have kept up mourning for her these last five days
and we lamented her in the deepest sorrow for that she was unjustly
done to die. This came from the gratuitous lying of the slave, the
blackamoor, and this was the manner of my killing her; so I conjure
thee, by the honour of thine ancestors, make haste to kill me and do
her justice upon me, as there is no living for me after her!" The
Caliph marvelled at his words and said, "By Allah, the young man is
excusable: I will hang none but the accursed slave and I will do a deed
which shall comfort the ill-at-ease and suffering, and which shall
please the All-glorious King."—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say,

When it was the Twentieth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph swore
he would hang none but the slave, for the youth was excusable. Then he
turned to Ja'afar and said to him, "Bring before me this accursed slave
who was the sole cause of this calamity; and, if thou bring him not
before me within three days, thou shalt be slain in his stead." So
Ja'afar fared forth weeping and saying. "Two deaths have already beset
me, nor shall the crock come of safe from every shock.' [FN#360] In
this matter craft and cunning are of no avail; but He who preserved my
life the first time can preserve it a second time. By Allah, I will not
leave my house during the three days of life which remain to me and let
the Truth (whose perfection be praised!) do e'en as He will." So he
kept his house three days, and on the fourth day he summoned the Kazis
and legal witnesses and made his last will and testament, and took
leave of his children weeping. Presently in came a messenger from the
Caliph and said to him, "The Commander of the Faithful is in the most
violent rage that can be, and he sendeth to seek thee and he sweareth
that the day shall certainly not pass without thy being hanged unless
the slave be forth-coming." When Ja'afar heard this he wept, and his
children and slaves and all who were in the house wept with him. After
he had bidden adieu to everybody except his youngest daughter, he
proceeded to farewell her; for he loved this wee one, who was a
beautiful child, more than all his other children; and he pressed her
to his breast and kissed her and wept bitterly at parting from her;
when he felt something round inside the bosom of her dress and asked
her, "O my little maid, what is in thy bosom pocket?"; "O my father,"
she replied, "it is an apple with the name of our Lord the Caliph
written upon it. Rayhán our slave brought it to me four days ago and
would not let me have it till I gave him two dinars for it." When
Ja'afar heard speak of the slave and the apple, he was glad and put his
hand into his child's pocket [FN#361] and drew out the apple and knew
it and rejoiced saying, "O ready Dispeller of trouble " [FN#362] Then
he bade them bring the slave and said to him, "Fie upon thee, Rayhan!
whence haddest thou this apple?" "By Allah, O my master," he replied,
"though a lie may get a man once off, yet may truth get him off, and
well off, again and again. I did not steal this apple from thy palace
nor from the gardens of the Commander of the Faithful. The fact is that
five days ago, as I was walking along one of the alleys of this city, I
saw some little ones at play and this apple in hand of one of them. So
I snatched it from him and beat him and he cried and said, 'O youth
this apple is my mother's and she is ill. She told my father how she
longed for an apple, so he travelled to Bassorah and bought her three
apples for three gold pieces, and I took one of them to play withal.'
He wept again, but I paid no heed to what he said and carried it off
and brought it here, and my little lady bought it of me for two dinars
of gold. And this is the whole story." When Ja'afar heard his words he
marvelled that the murder of the damsel and all this misery should have
been caused by his slave; he grieved for the relation of the slave to
himself, while rejoicing over his own deliverance, and he repeated
these lines: —

"If ill betide thee through thy slave, * Make him forthright thy
sacrifice:
A many serviles thou shalt find, * But life comes once and never
twice."


Then he took the slave's hand and, leading him to the Caliph, related
the story from first to last and the Caliph marvelled with extreme
astonishment, and laughed till he fell on his back and ordered that the
story be recorded and be made public amongst the people. But Ja'afar
said, "Marvel not, O Commander of the Faithful, at this adventure, for
it is not more wondrous than the History of the Wazir Núr al-Dín Ali of
Egypt and his brother Shams al-Dín Mohammed. — Quoth the Caliph, "Out
with it; but what can be stranger than this story?" And Ja'afar
answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, I will not tell it thee, save
on condition that thou pardon my slave;" and the Caliph rejoined, "If
it be indeed more wondrous than that of the three apples, I grant thee
his blood, and if not I will surely slay thy slave." So Ja'afar began
in these words the


TALE OF NUR AL-DIN AND HIS SON.

Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that in times of yore the land of
Egypt was ruled by a Sultan endowed with justice and generosity, one
who loved the pious poor and companied with the Olema and learned men;
and he had a Wazir, a wise and an experienced, well versed in affairs
and in the art of government. This Minister, who was a very old man,
had two sons, as they were two moons; never man saw the like of them
for beauty and grace, the elder called Shams al-Din Mohammed and the
younger Nur al-Din Ali; but the younger excelled the elder in
seemliness and pleasing semblance, so that folk heard his fame in far
countries and men flocked to Egypt for the purpose of seeing him. In
course of time their father, the Wazir, died and was deeply regretted
and mourned by the Sultan, who sent for his two sons and, investing
them with dresses of honour, [FN#363] said to them, "Let not your
hearts be troubled, for ye shall stand in your father's stead and be
joint Ministers of Egypt." At this they rejoiced and kissed the ground
before him and performed the ceremonial mourning [FN#364] for their
father during a full month; after which time they entered upon the
Wazirate, and the power passed into their hands as it had been in the
hands of their father, each doing duty for a week at a time. They lived
under the same roof and their word was one; and whenever the Sultan
desired to travel they took it by turns to be in attendance on him. It
fortuned one night that the Sultan purposed setting out on a journey
next morning, and the elder, whose turn it was to accompany him, was
sitting conversing with his brother and said to him, "O my brother, it
is my wish that we both marry, I and thou, two sisters; and go in to
our wives on one and the same night." "Do, O my brother, as thou
desirest," the younger replied, "for right is thy recking and surely I
will comply with thee in whatso thou sayest." So they agreed upon this
and quoth Shams al-Din, "If Allah decree that we marry two damsels and
go in to them on the same night, and they shall conceive on their
bridenights and bear children to us on the same day, and by Allah's
will thy wife bear thee a son and my wife bear me a daughter, let us
wed them either to other, for they will be cousins." Quoth Nur al-Din,
"O my brother, Shams al-Din, what dower [FN#365] wilt thou require from
my son for thy daughter?" Quoth Shams al-Din, "I will take three
thousand dinars and three pleasure gardens and three farms; and it
would not be seemly that the youth make contract for less than this."
When Nur al-Din heard such demand he said, "What manner of dower is
this thou wouldest impose upon my son? Wottest thou not that we are
brothers and both by Allah's grace Wazirs and equal in office? It
behoveth thee to offer thy daughter to my son without marriage
settlement; or if one need be, it should represent a mere nominal value
by way of show to the world: for thou knowest that the masculine is
worthier than the feminine, and my son is a male and our memory will be
preserved by him, not by thy daughter." "But what," said Shams al-Din,
"is she to have?"; and Nur al-Din continued, "Through her we shall not
be remembered among the Emirs of the earth; but I see thou wouldest do
with me according to the saying:—An thou wouldst bluff off a buyer, ask
him high price and higher; or as did a man who, they say, went to a
friend and asked something of him being in necessity and was answered,
'Bismillah, [FN#366] in the name of Allah, I will do all what thou
requirest but come to-morrow!' Whereupon the other replied in this
verse:—

'When he who is asked a favour saith "To-morrow," * The wise man wots
'tis vain to beg or borrow.'"


Quoth Shams al-Din, "Basta! [FN#367] I see thee fail in respect to me
by making thy son of more account than my daughter; and 'tis plain that
thine understanding is of the meanest and that thou lackest manners.
Thou remindest me of thy partnership in the Wazirate, when I admitted
thee to share with me only in pity for thee, and not wishing to mortify
thee; and that thou mightest help me as a manner of assistant. But
since thou talkest on this wise, by Allah, I will never marry my
daughter to thy son; no, not for her weight in gold!" When Nur al-Din
heard his brother's words he waxed wroth and said, "And I too, I will
never, never marry my son to thy daughter; no, not to keep from my lips
the cup of death." Shams al-Din replied, "I would not accept him as a
husband for her, and he is not worth a paring of her nail. Were I not
about to travel I would make an example of thee; however when I return
thou shalt see, and I will show thee, how I can assert my dignity and
vindicate my honour. But Allah doeth whatso He willeth."[FN#368] When
Nur al-Din heard this speech from his brother, he was filled with fury
and lost his wits for rage; but he hid what he felt and held his peace;
and each of the brothers passed the night in a place far apart, wild
with wrath against the other. As soon as morning dawned the Sultan
fared forth in state and crossed over from Cairo [FN#369] to Jizah
[FN#370] and made for the pyramids, accompanied by the Wazir Shams
al-Din, whose turn of duty it was, whilst his brother Nur al-din, who
passed the night in sore rage, rose with the light and prayed the
dawn-prayer. Then he betook himself to his treasury and, taking a small
pair of saddle-bags, filled them with gold; and he called to mind his
brother's threats and the contempt wherewith he had treated him, and he
repeated these couplets:—

"Travel! and thou shalt find new friends for old ones left behind; *
Toil! for the sweets of human life by toil and moil are found:
The stay-at-home no honour wins nor aught attains but want; * So leave
thy place of birth [FN#371] and wander all the world around!
I've seen, and very oft I've seen, how standing water stinks, * And
only flowing sweetens it and trotting makes it sound:
And were the moon forever full and ne'er to wax or wane, * Man would
not strain his watchful eyes to see its gladsome round:
Except the lion leave his lair he ne'er would fell his game, * Except
the arrow leave the bow ne'er had it reached its bound:
Gold-dust is dust the while it lies untravelled in the mine, * And
aloes-wood mere fuel is upon its native ground:
And gold shall win his highest worth when from his goal ungoal'd; * And
aloes sent to foreign parts grows costlier than gold."


When he ended his verse he bade one of his pages saddle him his Nubian
mare-mule with her padded selle. Now she was a dapple-grey, [FN#372]
with ears like reed-pens and legs like columns and a back high and
strong as a dome builded on pillars; her saddle was of gold-cloth and
her stirrups of Indian steel, and her housing of Ispahan velvet; she
had trappings which would serve the Chosroës, and she was like a bride
adorned for her wedding night. Moreover he bade lay on her back a piece
of silk for a seat, and a prayer-carpet under which were his
saddle-bags. When this was done he said to his pages and slaves, "I
purpose going forth a-pleasuring outside the city on the road to
Kalyub-town, [FN#373] and I shall lie three nights abroad; so let none
of you follow me, for there is something straiteneth my breast." Then
he mounted the mule in haste; and, taking with him some provaunt for
the way, set out from Cairo and faced the open and uncultivated country
lying around it. [FN#374] About noontide he entered Bilbays-city,
[FN#375] where he dismounted and stayed awhile to rest himself and his
mule and ate some of his victual. He bought at Bilbays all he wanted
for himself and forage for his mule and then fared on the way of the
waste. Towards night-fall he entered a town called Sa'adiyah [FN#376]
where he alighted and took out somewhat of his viaticum and ate; then
he spread his strip of silk on the sand and set the saddle-bags under
his head and slept in the open air; for he was still overcome with
anger. When morning dawned he mounted and rode onward till he reached
the Holy City, [FN#377] Jerusalem, and thence he made Aleppo, where he
dismounted at one of the caravanserais and abode three days to rest
himself and the mule and to smell the air. [FN#378] Then, being
determined to travel afar and Allah having written safety in his fate,
he set out again, wending without wotting whither he was going; and,
having fallen in with certain couriers, he stinted not travelling till
he had reached Bassorah-city albeit he knew not what the place was. It
was dark night when he alighted at the Khan, so he spread out his
prayer-carpet and took down the saddle-bags from the back of the mule
and gave her with her furniture in charge of the door-keeper that he
might walk her about. The man took her and did as he was bid. Now it so
happened that the Wazir of Bassorah, a man shot in years, was sitting
at the lattice-window of his palace opposite the Khan and he saw the
porter walking the mule up and down. He was struck by her trappings of
price and thought her a nice beast fit for the riding of Wazirs or even
of royalties; and the more he looked the more was he perplexed till at
last he said to one of his pages, "Bring hither yon door-keeper," The
page went and returned to the Wazir with the porter who kissed the
ground between his hands, and the Minister asked him, "Who is the owner
of yonder mule and what manner of man is he?"; and he answered, "O my
lord, the owner of this mule is a comely young man of pleasant manners,
withal grave and dignified, and doubtless one of the sons of the
merchants." When the Wazir heard the door-keeper's words he arose
forthright; and, mounting his horse, rode to the Khan [FN#379] and went
in to Nur al-Din who, seeing the minister making towards him, rose to
his feet and advanced to meet him and saluted him. The Wazir welcomed
him to Bassorah and dismounting, embraced him and made him sit down by
his side and said, "O my son, whence comest thou and what dost thou
seek?" "O my lord," Nur al-Din replied, "I have come from Cairo-city of
which my father was whilome Wazir; but he hath been removed to the
grace of Allah;" and he informed him of all that had befallen him from
beginning to end, adding, "I am resolved never to return home before I
have seen all the cities and countries of the world." When the Wazir
heard this, he said to him, "O my son, hearken not to the voice of
passion lest it cast thee into the pit; for indeed many regions be
waste places and I fear for thee the turns of Time." Then he let load
the saddle-bags and the silk and prayer-carpets on the mule and carried
Nur al-Din to his own house, where he lodged him in a pleasant place
and entreated him honourably and made much of him, for he inclined to
love him with exceeding love. After a while he said to him, "O my son,
here am I left a man in years and have no male children, but Allah hath
blessed me with a daughter who eventh thee in beauty; and I have
rejected all her many suitors, men of rank and substance. But affection
for thee hath entered into my heart; say me, then, wilt thou be to her
a husband? If thou accept this, I will go up with thee to the Sultan of
Bassorah [FN#380] and will tell him that thou art my nephew, the son of
my brother, and bring thee to be appointed Wazir in my place that I may
keep the house for, by Allah, O my son, I am stricken in years and
aweary." When Nur al-Din heard the Wazir's words, he bowed his head in
modesty and said, "To hear is to obey!" At this the Wazir rejoiced and
bade his servants prepare a feast and decorate the great assembly-hall,
wherein they were wont to celebrate the marriages of Emirs and
Grandees. Then he assembled his friends and the notables of the reign
and the merchants of Bassorah and when all stood before him he said to
them, "I had a brother who was Wazir in the land of Egypt, and Allah
Almighty blessed him with two sons, whilst to me, as well ye wot, He
hath given a daughter. My brother charged me to marry my daughter to
one of his sons, whereto I assented; and, when my daughter was of age
to marry, he sent me one of his sons, the young man now present, to
whom I purpose marrying her, drawing up the contract and celebrating
the night of unveiling with due ceremony; for he is nearer and dearer
to me than a stranger and, after the wedding, if he please he shall
abide with me, or if he desire to travel I will forward him and his
wife to his father's home." Hereat one and all replied, "Right is thy
recking;" and they all looked at the bridegroom and were pleased with
him. So the Wazir sent for the Kazi and legal witnesses and they wrote
out the marriage-contract, after which the slaves perfumed the guests
with incense, [FN#381] and served them with sherbet of sugar and
sprinkled rose-water on them and all went their ways. Then the Wazir
bade his servants take Nur al-Din to the Hammam-baths and sent him a
suit of the best of his own especial raiment, and napkins and towelry
and bowls and perfume-burners and all else that was required. After the
bath, when he came out and donned the dress, he was even as the full
moon on the fourteenth night; and he mounted his mule and stayed not
till he reached the Wazir's palace. There he dismounted and went in to
the Minister and kissed his hands, and the Wazir bade him welcome.—And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

When it was the Twenty-first Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir stood
up to him and welcoming him said, "Arise and go in to thy wife this
night, and on the morrow I will carry thee to the Sultan, and pray
Allah bless thee with all manner of weal." So Nur al-Din left him and
went in to his wife the Wazir's daughter. Thus far concerning him, but
as regards his elder brother, Shams al-Din, he was absent with the
Sultan a long time and when he returned from his journey he found not
his brother; and he asked of his servants and slaves who answered, "On
the day of thy departure with the Sultan, thy brother mounted his mule
fully caparisoned as for state procession saying, 'I am going towards
Kalyub-town and I shall be absent one day or at most two days; for my
breast is straitened, and let none of you follow me.' Then he fared
forth and from that time to this we have heard no tidings of him."
Shams al-Din was greatly troubled at the sudden disappearance of his
brother and grieved with exceeding grief at the loss and said to
himself, "This is only because I chided and upbraided him the night
before my departure with the Sultan; haply his feelings were hurt and
he fared forth a-travelling; but I must send after him." Then he went
in to the Sultan and acquainted him with what had happened and wrote
letters and dispatches, which he sent by running footmen to his
deputies in every province. But during the twenty days of his brother's
absence Nur al-Din had travelled far and had reached Bassorah; so after
diligent search the messengers failed to come at any news of him and
returned. Thereupon Shams al-Din despaired of finding his brother and
said, "Indeed I went beyond all bounds in what I said to him with
reference to the marriage of our children. Would that I had not done
so! This all cometh of my lack of wit and want of caution." Soon after
this he sought in marriage the daughter of a Cairene merchant, [FN#382]
and drew up the marriage contract and went in to her. And it so chanced
that, on the very same night when Shams al-Din went in to his wife, Nur
al-Din also went in to his wife the daughter of the Wazir of Bassorah;
this being in accordance with the will of Almighty Allah, that He might
deal the decrees of Destiny to His creatures. Furthermore, it was as
the two brothers had said; for their two wives became pregnant by them
on the same night and both were brought to bed on the same day; the
wife of Shams al-Din, Wazir of Egypt, of a daughter, never in Cairo was
seen a fairer; and the wife of Nur al-Din of a son, none more beautiful
was ever seen in his time, as one of the poets said concerning the like
of him:—

That jetty hair, that glossy brow,
     My slender-waisted youth, of thine,
Can darkness round creation throw,
     Or make it brightly shine.
The dusky mole that faintly shows
     Upon his cheek, ah! blame it not:
The tulip-flower never blows
     Undarkened by its spot [FN#383]


And as another also said:—

His scent was musk and his cheek was rose; * His teeth are pearls and
his lips drop wine;
His form is a brand and his hips a hill; * His hair is night and his
face moon-shine.


They named the boy Badr al-Din Hasan and his grandfather, the Wazir of
Bassorah, rejoiced in him and, on the seventh day after his birth, made
entertainments and spread banquets which would befit the birth of
Kings' sons and heirs. Then he took Nur al-Din and went up with him to
the Sultan, and his son-in-law, when he came before the presence of the
King, kissed the ground between his hands and repeated these verses,
for he was ready of speech, firm of sprite and good in heart as he was
goodly in form:—

"The world's best joys long be thy lot, my lord! * And last while
darkness and the dawn o'erlap:
O thou who makest, when we greet thy gifts, * The world to dance and
Time his palms to clap."[FN#384]


Then the Sultan rose up to honour them, and thanking Nur al-Din for his
fine compliment, asked the Wazir, "Who may be this young man?"; and the
Minister answered, "This is my brother's son," and related his tale
from first to last. Quoth the Sultan, "And how comes he to be thy
nephew and we have never heard speak of him?" Quoth the Minister, "O
our lord the Sultan, I had a brother who was Wazir in the land of Egypt
and he died, leaving two sons, whereof the elder hath taken his
father's place and the younger, whom thou seest, came to me. I had
sworn I would not marry my daughter to any but to him; so when he came
I married him to her. [FN#385] Now he is young and I am old; my hearing
is dulled and my judgement is easily fooled; wherefore I would solicit
our lord the Sultan [FN#386] to set him in my stead, for he is my
brother's son and my daughter's husband; and he is fit for the
Wazirate, being a man of good counsel and ready contrivance." The
Sultan looked at Nur al-Din and liked him, so he stablished him in
office as the Wazir had requested and formally appointed him,
presenting him with a splendid dress of honour and a she-mule from his
private stud; and assigning to him solde, stipends and supplies. Nur
al-Din kissed the Sultan's hand and went home, he and his
father-in-law, joying with exceeding joy and saying, "All this
followeth on the heels of the boy Hasan's birth!" Next day he presented
himself before the King and, kissing the ground, began repeating:—

"Grow thy weal and thy welfare day by day: * And thy luck prevail o'er
the envier's spite;
And ne'er cease thy days to be white as day, * And thy foeman's day to
be black as night!"


The Sultan bade him be seated on the Wazir's seat, so he sat down and
applied himself to the business of his office and went into the cases
of the lieges and their suits, as is the wont of Ministers; while the
Sultan watched him and wondered at his wit and good sense, judgement
and insight. Wherefor he loved him and took him into intimacy. When the
Divan was dismissed Nur al-Din returned to his house and related what
had passed to his father-in-law who rejoiced. And thenceforward Nur
al-Din ceased not so to administer the Wazirate that the Sultan would
not be parted from him night or day; and increased his stipend and
supplies until his means were ample and he became the owner of ships
that made trading voyages at his command, as well as of Mamelukes and
blackamoor slaves; and he laid out many estates and set up Persian
wheels and planted gardens. When his son Hasan was four years of age,
the old Wazir deceased and he made for his father-in-law a sumptuous
funeral ceremony ere he was laid in the dust. Then he occupied himself
with the education of this son and, when the boy waxed strong and came
to the age of seven, he brought him a Fakih, a doctor of law and
religion, to teach him in his own house and charged him to give him a
good education and instruct him in politeness and good manners. So the
tutor made the boy read and retain all varieties of useful knowledge,
after he had spent some years in learning the Koran by heart; [FN#387]
and he ceased not to grow in beauty and stature and symmetry, even as
saith the poet:—

In his face-sky shines the fullest moon; * In his cheeks' anemone glows
the sun:
He so conquered Beauty that he hath won * All charms of humanity one by
one.


The professor brought him up in his father's palace teaching him
reading, writing and cyphering, theology and belles lettres. His
grandfather the old Wazir had bequeathed to him the whole of his
property when he was but four years of age. Now during all the time of
his earliest youth he had never left the house, till on a certain day
his father, the Wazir Nur al-Din, clad him in his best clothes and,
mounting him on a she-mule of the finest, went up with him to the
Sultan. The King gazed at Badr al-Din Hasan and marvelled at his
comeliness and loved him. As for the city-folk, when he first passed
before them with his father, they marvelled at his exceeding beauty and
sat down on the road expecting his return, that they might look their
fill on his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace; even
as the poet said in these verses:—

As the sage watched the stars, the semblance clear
Of a fair youth on 's scroll he saw appear.
Those jetty locks Canopus o'er him threw,
And tinged his temple curls a musky hue;
Mars dyed his ruddy cheek; and from his eyes
The Archer-star his glittering arrow flies;
His wit from Hermes came; and Soha's care,
(The half-seen star that dimly haunts the Bear)
Kept off all evil eyes that threaten and ensnare,
The sage stood mazed to see such fortunes meet,
And Luna kissed the earth beneath his feet. [FN#388]


And they blessed him aloud as he passed and called upon Almighty Allah
to bless him. [FN#389] The Sultan entreated the lad with especial
favour and said to his father, "O Wazir, thou must needs bring him
daily to my presence;" whereupon he replied, "I hear and I obey." Then
the Wazir returned home with his son and ceased not to carry him to
court till he reached the age of twenty. At that time the Minister
sickened and, sending for Badr al-Din Hasan, said to him, "Know, O my
son, that the world of the Present is but a house of mortality, while
that of the Future is a house of eternity. I wish, before I die, to
bequeath thee certain charges and do thou take heed of what I say and
incline thy heart to my words." Then he gave him his last instructions
as to the properest way of dealing with his neighbours and the due
management of his affairs; after which he called to mind his brother
and his home and his native land and wept over his separation from
those he had first loved. Then he wiped away his tears and, turning to
his son, said to him, "Before I proceed, O my son, to my last charges
and injunctions, know that I have a brother, and thou hast an uncle,
Shams al-Din hight, the Wazir of Cairo, which whom I parted, leaving
him against his will. Now take thee a sheet of paper and write upon it
whatso I say to thee." Badr al-Din took a fair leaf and set about doing
his father's bidding and he wrote thereon a full account of what had
happened to his sire first and last; the dates of his arrival at
Bassorah and of his foregathering with the Wazir; of his marriage, of
his going in to the Minister's daughter and of the birth of his son;
brief, his life of forty years from the date of his dispute with his
brother, adding the words, "And this is written at my dictation and may
Almighty Allah be with him when I am gone!" Then he folded the paper
and sealed it and said, "O Hasan, O my son, keep this paper with all
care; for it will enable thee to stablish thine origin and rank and
lineage and, if anything contrary befal thee, set out for Cairo and ask
for thine uncle and show him this paper and say to him that I died a
stranger far from mine own people and full of yearning to see him and
them." So Badr al-Din Hasan took the document and folded it; and,
wrapping it up in a piece of waxed cloth, sewed it like a talisman
between the inner and outer cloth of his skull-cap and wound his light
turband [FN#390] round it. And he fell to weeping over his father and
at parting with him, and he but a boy. Then Nur al-Din lapsed into a
swoon, the forerunner of death; but presently recovering himself he
said, "O Hasan, O my son, I will now bequeath to thee five last
behests. The FIRST BEHEST is, Be over-intimate with none, nor frequent
any, nor be familiar with any; so shalt thou be safe from his mischief;
[FN#391] for security lieth in seclusion of thought and a certain
retirement from the society of thy fellows; and I have heard it said by
a poet:—

In this world there is none thou mayst count upon * To befriend thy
case in the nick of need:
So live for thyself nursing hope of none * Such counsel I give thee:
enow, take heed!


The SECOND BEHEST is, O my son: Deal harshly with none lest fortune
with thee deal hardly; for the fortune of this world is one day with
thee and another day against thee and all worldly goods are but a loan
to be repaid. And I have heard a poet say:—

Take thought nor haste to win the thing thou wilt; * Have ruth on man
for ruth thou may'st require:
No hand is there but Allah's hand is higher; * No tyrant but shall rue
worse tyrant's ire!


The THIRD BEHEST is, Learn to be silent in society and let thine own
faults distract thine attention from the faults of other men: for it is
said:—In silence dwelleth safety, and thereon I have heard the lines
that tell us:—

Reserve's a jewel, Silence safety is; * Whenas thou speakest many a
word withhold;
For an of Silence thou repent thee once, * Of speech thou shalt repent
times manifold.


The FOURTH BEHEST, O my son, is Beware of wine-bibbing, for wine is the
head of all frowardness and a fine solvent of human wits. So shun, and
again I say, shun mixing strong liquor; for I have heard a poet say
[FN#392]:—

From wine [FN#393] I turn and whoso wine-cups swill; * Becoming one of
those who deem it ill:
Wine driveth man to miss salvation-way, [FN#394] * And opes the gateway
wide to sins that kill.


The FIFTH BEHEST, O my son, is Keep thy wealth and it will keep thee;
guard thy money and it will guard thee; and waste not thy substance
lest haply thou come to want and must fare a-begging from the meanest
of mankind. Save thy dirhams and deem them the sovereignest salve for
the wounds of the world. And here again I have heard that one of the
poets said:—

When fails my wealth no friend will deign befriend: * When wealth
abounds all friends their friendship tender:
How many friends lent aid my wealth to spend; * But friends to lack of
wealth no friendship render.


On this wise Nur al-Din ceased not to counsel his son Badr al-Din Hasan
till his hour came and, sighing one sobbing sigh, his life went forth.
Then the voice of mourning and keening rose high in his house and the
Sultan and all the grandees grieved for him and buried him; but his son
ceased not lamenting his loss for two months, during which he never
mounted horse, nor attended the Divan nor presented himself before the
Sultan. At last the King, being wroth with him, stablished in his stead
one of his Chamberlains and made him Wazir, giving orders to seize and
set seals on all Nur al-Din's houses and goods and domains. So the new
Wazir went forth with a mighty posse of Chamberlains and people of the
Divan, and watchmen and a host of idlers to do this and to seize Badr
al-Din Hasan and carry him before the King, who would deal with him as
he deemed fit. Now there was among the crowd of followers a Mameluke of
the deceased Wazir who, when he heard this order, urged his horse and
rode at full speed to the house of Badr al-Din Hasan; for he cold not
endure to see the ruin of his old master's son. He found him sitting at
the gate with head hung down and sorrowing, as was his wont, for the
loss of his father; so he dismounted and kissing his hand said to him,
"O my lord and son of my lord, haste ere ruin come and lay waste!" When
Hasan heard this he trembled and asked, "What may be the matter?; and
the man answered, "The Sultan is angered with thee and hath issued a
warrant against thee, and evil cometh hard upon my track; so flee with
thy life!" At these words Hasan's heart flamed with the fire of bale,
and his rose-red cheek turned pale, and he said to the "Mameluke, "O my
brother, is there time for me to go in and get me some worldly gear
which may stand me in stead during my strangerhood?" But the slave
replied, "O my lord, up at once and save thyself and leave this house,
while it is yet time." And he quoted these lines:—

"Escape with thy life, if oppression betide thee, * And let the house
of its builder's fate!
Country for country thou'lt find, if thou seek it; * Life for life
never, early or late.
It is strange men should dwell in the house of abjection, * When the
plain of God's earth is so wide and so great!" [FN#395]


At these words of the Mameluke, Badr al-Din covered his head with the
skirt of his garment and went forth on foot till he stood outside of
the city, where he heard folk saying, "The Sultan hath sent his new
Wazir to the house of the old Wazir, now no more, to seal his property
and seize his son Badr al-Din Hasan and take him before the presence,
that he may put him to death; " and all cried, "Alas for his beauty and
his loveliness!" When he heard this he fled forth at hazard, knowing
not whither he was going, and gave not over hurrying onwards till
Destiny drove him to his father's tomb. So he entered the cemetery and,
threading his way through the graves, at last he reached the sepulchre
where he sat down and let fall from his head the skirt of his long robe
[FN#396] which was made of brocade with a gold-embroidered hem whereon
were worked these couplets:—

O thou whose forehead, like the radiant East, * Tells of the stars of
Heaven and bounteous dews:
Endure thine honour to the latest day, * And Time thy growth of glory
ne'er refuse!


While he was sitting by his father's tomb behold, there came to him a
Jew as he were a Shroff, [FN#397] a money-changer, with a pair of
saddle-bags containing much gold, who accosted him and kissed his hand,
saying, "Whither bound, O my lord; 'tis late in the day and thou art
clad but lightly, and I read signs of trouble in thy face?" "I was
sleeping within this very hour," answered Hasan, "when my father
appeared to me and chid me for not having visited his tomb; so I awoke
trembling and came hither forthright lest the day should go by without
my visiting him, which would have been grievous to me." "O my lord,"
rejoined the Jew, [FN#398] "thy father had many merchantmen at sea and,
as some of them are now due, it is my wish to buy of thee the cargo of
the first ship that cometh into port with this thousand dinars of
gold." "I consent," quoth Hasan, whereupon the Jew took out a bag full
of gold and counted out a thousand sequins which he gave to Hasan, the
son of the Wazir, saying, "Write me a letter of sale and seal it." So
Hasan took a pen and paper and wrote these words in duplicate, "The
writer, Hasan Badr al-Din, son of Wazir Nur al-Din, hath sold to Isaac
the Jew all the cargo of the first of his father's ships which cometh
into port, for a thousand dinars, and he hath received the price in
advance." And after he had taken one copy the Jew put it into his pouch
and went away; but Hasan fell a-weeping as he thought of the dignity
and prosperity which had erst been his and he began reciting:—

"This house, my lady, since you left is now a home no more * For me,
nor neighbours, since you left, prove kind and neighbourly:
The friend, whilere I took to heart, alas! no more to me * Is friend;
and even Luna's self displayeth lunacy:
You left and by your going left the world a waste, a wold, * And lies a
gloomy murk upon the face of hill and lea:
O may the raven-bird whose cry our hapless parting croaked * Find ne'er
a nesty home and eke shed all his plumery!
At length my patience fails me; and this absence wastes my flesh; * How
many a veil by severance rent our eyes are doomed see:
Ah! shall I ever sight again our fair past nights of yore; * And shall
a single house become a home for me once more?"


Then he wept with exceeding weeping and night came upon him; so he
leant his head against his father's grave and sleep overcame him: Glory
to him who sleepeth not! He ceased not slumbering till the moon rose,
when his head slipped from off the tomb and he lay on his back, with
limbs outstretched, his face shining bright in the moonlight. Now the
cemetery was haunted day and night by Jinns who were of the True
Believers, and presently came out a Jinniyah who, seeing Hasan asleep,
marvelled at his beauty and loveliness and cried, "Glory to God! This
youth can be none other than one of the Wuldan of Paradise.[FN#399]
Then she flew firmament-wards to circle it, as was her custom, and met
an Ifrit on the wing who saluted her and she said to him, "Whence
comest thou?" "From Cairo," he replied. "Wilt thou come with me and
look upon the beauty of a youth who sleepeth in yonder burial place?"
she asked and he answered, "I will." So they flew till they lighted at
the tomb and she showed him the youth and said, "Now diddest thou ever
in thy born days see aught like this?" The Ifrit looked upon him and
exclaimed, "Praise be to Him that hath no equal! But, O my sister,
shall I tell thee what I have seen this day?" Asked she, "What is
that?" and he answered, "I have seen the counterpart of this youth in
the land of Egypt. She is the daughter of the Wazir Shams al-Din and
she is a model of beauty and loveliness, of fairest favour and formous
form, and dight with symmetry and perfect grace. When she had reached
the age of nineteen, [FN#400] the Sultan of Egypt heard of her and,
sending for the Wazir her father, said to him, 'Hear me, O Wazir: it
hath reached mine ear that thou hast a daughter and I wish to demand
her of thee in marriage." The Wazir replied, "O our lord the Sultan,
deign accept my excuses and take compassion on my sorrows, for thou
knowest that my brother, who was partner with me in the Wazirate,
disappeared from amongst us many years ago and we wot not where he is.
Now the cause of his departure was that one night, as we were sitting
together and talking of wives and children to come, we had words on the
matter and he went off in high dudgeon. But I swore that I would marry
my daughter to none save to the son of my brother on the day her mother
gave her birth, which was nigh upon nineteen years ago. I have lately
heard that my brother died at Bassorah, where he had married the
daughter of the Wazir and that she bare him a son; and I will not marry
my daughter but to him in honour of my brother's memory. I recorded the
date of my marriage and the conception of my wife and the birth of my
daughter; and from her horoscope I find that her name is conjoined with
that of her cousin; [FN#401] and there are damsels in foison for our
lord the Sultan.' The King, hearing his Minister's answer and refusal,
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and cried, 'When the like of me asketh
a girl in marriage of the like of thee, he conferreth an honour, and
thou rejectest me and puttest me off with cold [FN#402] excuses! Now,
by the life of my head I will marry her to the meanest of my men in
spite of the nose of thee! [FN#403] There was in the palace a
horse-groom which was a Gobbo with a bunch to his breast and a hunch to
his back; and the Sultan sent for him and married him to the daughter
of the Wazir, lief or loath, and hath ordered a pompous marriage
procession for him and that he go in to his bride this very night. I
have now just flown hither from Cairo, where I left the Hunchback at
the door of the Hammam-bath amidst the Sultan's white slaves who were
waving lighted flambeaux about him. As for the Minister's daughter she
sitteth among her nurses and tirewomen, weeping and wailing; for they
have forbidden her father to come near her. Never have I seen, O my
sister, more hideous being than this Hunchback [FN#404] whilst the
young lady is the likest of all folk to this young man, albeit even
fairer than he,"—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-second Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Jinni
narrated to the Jinniyah how the King had caused the wedding contract
to be drawn up between the hunchbacked groom and the lovely young lady
who was heart-broken for sorrow; and how she was the fairest of created
things and even more beautiful than this youth, the Jinniyah cried at
him "Thou liest! this youth is handsomer than any one of his day." The
Ifrit gave her the lie again, adding, "By Allah, O my sister, the
damsel I speak of is fairer than this; yet none but he deserveth her,
for they resemble each other like brother and sister or at least
cousins. And, well-away! how she is wasted upon that Hunchback!" Then
said she, "O my brother, let us get under him and lift him up and carry
him to Cairo, that we may compare him with the damsel of whom thou
speakest and so determine whether of the twain is the fairer." "To hear
is to obey!" replied he, "thou speakest to the point; nor is there a
righter recking than this of thine, and I myself will carry him." So he
raised him from the ground and flew with him like a bird soaring in
upper air, the Ifritah keeping close by his side at equal speed, till
he alighted with him in the city of Cairo and set him down on a stone
bench and woke him up. He roused himself and finding that he was no
longer at his father's tomb in Bassorah-city he looked right and left
and saw that he was in a strange place; and he would have cried out;
but the Ifrit gave him a cuff which persuaded him to keep silence. Then
he brought him rich raiment and clothed him therein and, giving him a
lighted flambeau, said, "Know that I have brought thee hither, meaning
to do thee a good turn for the love of Allah: so take this torch and
mingle with the people at the Hammam-door and walk on with them without
stopping till thou reach the house of the wedding-festival; then go
boldly forward and enter the great saloon; and fear none, but take thy
stand at the right hand of the Hunchback bridegroom; and, as often as
any of the nurses and tirewomen and singing-girls come up to thee,
[FN#405] put thy hand into thy pocket which thou wilt find filled with
gold. Take it out and throw it to them and spare not; for as often as
thou thrustest fingers in pouch thou shalt find it full of coin. Give
largesse by handsful and fear nothing, but set thy trust upon Him who
created thee, for this is not by thine own strength but by that of
Allah Almighty, that His decrees may take effect upon his creatures."
When Badr al-Din Hasan heard these words from the Ifrit he said to
himself, "Would Heaven I knew what all this means and what is the cause
of such kindness!" However, he mingled with the people and, lighting
his flambeau, moved on with the bridal procession till he came to the
bath where he found the Hunchback already on horseback. Then he pushed
his way in among the crowd, a veritable beauty of a man in the finest
apparel, wearing tarbush [FN#406] and turband and a long-sleeved robe
purfled with gold; and, as often as the singing-women stopped for the
people to give them largesse, he thrust his hand into his pocket and,
finding it full of gold, took out a handful and threw it on the
tambourine [FN#407] till he had filled it with gold pieces for the
music-girls and the tirewomen. The singers were amazed by his bounty
and the people marvelled at his beauty and loveliness and the splendour
of his dress. He ceased not to do thus till he reached the mansion of
the Wazir (who was his uncle), where the Chamberlains drove back the
people and forbade them to go forward; but the singing-girls and the
tirewomen said, "By Allah we will not enter unless this young man enter
with us, for he hath given us length o' life with his largesse and we
will not display the bride unless he be present." Therewith they
carried him into the bridal hall and made him sit down defying the evil
glances of the hunchbacked bridegroom. The wives of the Emirs and
Wazirs and Chamberlains and Courtiers all stood in double line, each
holding a massy cierge ready lighted; all wore thin face-veils and the
two rows right and left extended from the bride's throne [FN#408] to
the head of the hall adjoining the chamber whence she was to come
forth. When the ladies saw Badr al-Din Hasan and noted his beauty and
loveliness and his face that shone like the new moon, their hearts
inclined to him and the singing-girls said to all that were present,
"Know that this beauty crossed our hands with naught but red gold; so
be not chary to do him womanly service and comply with all he says, no
matter what he ask. [FN#409] So all the women crowded around Hasan with
their torches and gazed on his loveliness and envied him his beauty;
and one and all would gladly have lain on his bosom an hour or rather a
year. Their hearts were so troubled that they let fall their veils from
before their faces and said, "Happy she who belongeth to this youth or
to whom he belongeth!"; and they called down curses on the crooked
groom and on him who was the cause of his marriage to the girl-beauty;
and as often as they blessed Badr al-Din Hasan they damned the
Hunchback, saying, "Verily this youth and none else deserveth our
Bride: Ah, well-away for such a lovely one with this hideous Quasimodo;
Allah's curse light on his head and on the Sultan who commanded the
marriage!" Then the singing-girls beat their tabrets and lulliloo'd
with joy, announcing the appearing of the bride; and the Wazir's
daughter came in surrounded by her tirewomen who had made her goodly to
look upon; for they had perfumed her and incensed her and adorned her
hair; and they had robed her in raiment and ornaments befitting the
mighty Chosroes Kings. The most notable part of her dress was a loose
robe worn over her other garments; it was diapered in red gold with
figures of wild beasts, and birds whose eyes and beaks were of gems,
and claws of red rubies and green beryl; and her neck was graced with a
necklace of Yamani work, worth thousands of gold pieces, whose bezels
were great round jewels of sorts, the like of which was never owned by
Kaysar or by Tobba King. [FN#410] And the bride was as the full moon
when at fullest on fourteenth night; and as she paced into the hall she
was like one of the Houris of Heaven—praise be to Him who created her
in such splendour of beauty! The ladies encompassed her as the white
contains the black of the eye, they clustering like stars whilst she
shone amongst them like the moon when it eats up the clouds. Now Badr
al-Din Hasan of Bassorah was sitting in full gaze of the folk, when the
bride came forward with her graceful swaying and swimming gait, and her
hunchbacked groom stood up to meet [FN#411] and receive her: she,
however, turned away from the wight and walked forward till she stood
before her cousin Hasan, the son of her uncle. Whereat the people
laughed. But when the wedding-guests saw her thus attracted towards
Badr al-Din they made a mighty clamour and the singing-women shouted
their loudest; whereupon he put his hand into his pocket and, pulling
out a handful of gold, cast it into their tambourines and the girls
rejoiced and said, "Could we win our wish this bride were thine!" At
this he smiled and the folk came round him, flambeaux in hand like the
eyeball round the pupil, while the Gobbo bridegroom was left sitting
alone much like a tail-less baboon; for every time they lighted a
candle for him it went out willy-nilly, so he was left in darkness and
silence and looking at naught but himself. [FN#412] When Badr al-Din
Hasan saw the bridegroom sitting lonesome in the dark, and all the
wedding-guests with their flambeaux and wax candles crowding around
himself, he was bewildered and marvelled much; but when he looked at
his cousin, the daughter of his uncle, he rejoiced and felt an inward
delight: he longed to greet her and gazed intently on her face which
was radiant with light and brilliancy. Then the tirewomen took off her
veil and displayed her in the first bridal dress which was of scarlet
satin; and Hasan had a view of her which dazzled his sight and dazed
his wits, as she moved to and fro, swaying with graceful gait; [FN#413]
and she turned the heads of all the guests, women as well as men, for
she was even as saith the surpassing poet:—

A sun on wand in knoll of sand she showed * Clad in her cramoisy-hued
chemisette:
Of her lips honey-dew she gave me drink, * And with her rosy cheeks
quencht fire she set.


Then they changed that dress and displayed her in a robe of azure; and
she reappeared like the full moon when it riseth over the horizon, with
her coal-black hair and cheeks delicately fair; and teeth shown in
sweet smiling and breasts firm rising and crowning sides of the softest
and waist of the roundest. And in this second suit she was as a certain
master of high conceits saith of the like of her:—

She came apparelled in an azure vest, * Ultramarine, as skies are deckt
and dight;
I view'd th' unparellel'd sight, which show'd my eyes * A moon of
Summer on a Winter-night.


Then they changed that suit for another and, veiling her face in the
luxuriance of her hair, loosed her lovelocks, so dark, so long that
their darkness and length outvied the darkest nights, and she shot
through all hearts with the magical shaft of her eye-babes. They
displayed her in the third dress and she was as said of her the sayer:—

Veiling her cheeks with hair a-morn she comes, * And I her mischiefs
with the cloud compare:
Saying, "Thou veilest morn with night!" "Ah, no!" * Quoth she, "I
shroud full moon with darkling air!"


Then they displayed her in the fourth bridal dress and she came forward
shining like the rising sun and swaying to and fro with lovesome grace
and supple ease like a gazelle-fawn. And she clave all hearts with the
arrows of her eyelashes, even as saith one who described a charmer like
her:—

The sun of beauty she to sight appears * And, lovely-coy, she mocks all
loveliness;
And when he fronts her favour and her smile * A-morn, the Sun of day in
clouds must dress.


Then she came forth in the fifth dress, a very light of loveliness like
a wand of waving willow or a gazelle of the thirsty wold. Those locks
which stung like scorpions along her cheeks were bent, and her neck was
bowed in blandishment, and her hips quivered as she went. As saith one
of the poets describing her in verse:—

She comes like fullest moon on happy night; * Taper of waist, with
shape of magic might:
She hath an eye whose glances quell mankind, * And Ruby on her cheeks
reflects his light:
Enveils her hips the blackness of her hair; *Beware of curls that bite
with viper-bite!
Her sides are silken-soft, the while the heart * Mere rock behind that
surface lurks from sight:
From the fringed curtains of her eyne she shoots * Shafts which at
farthest range on mark alight:
When round her neck or waist I throw my arms * Her breasts repel me
with their hardened height.
Ah, how her beauty all excels! ah how * That shape transcends the
graceful waving bough!


Then they adorned her with the sixth toilette, a dress which was green.
And now she shamed in her slender straightness the nut-brown spear; her
radiant face dimmed the brightest beams of full moon and she outdid the
bending branches in gentle movement and flexile grace. Her loveliness
exalted the beauties of earth's four quarters and she broke men's
hearts by the significance of her semblance; for she was even as saith
one of the poets in these lines:—

A damsel 'twas the tirer's art had decked with snares and
sleight.[FN#414] * And robed in rays as though the sun from her had
borrowed light:
She came before us wondrous clad in chemisette of green, * As veiled by
its leafy screen pomegranate hides from sight:
And when he said "How callest thou the manner of thy dress?" * She
answered us in pleasant way with double meaning dight;
"We call this garment creve-coeur; and rightly is it hight, * For many
a heart wi' this we broke [FN#415] and conquered many a sprite!"


Then they displayed her in the seventh dress, coloured between
safflower [FN#416] and saffron, even as one of the poets saith:—

In vest of saffron pale and safflower red * Musk'd, sandal'd
ambergris'd, she came to front:
"Rise!" cried her youth, "go forth and show thyself!" * "Sit!" said her
hips, "we cannot bear the brunt!"
And when I craved a bout, her Beauty said * "Do, do!" and said her
pretty shame, "Don't, don't!"


Thus they displayed the bride in all her seven toilettes before Hasan
al-Basri, wholly neglecting the Gobbo who sat moping alone; and, when
she opened her eyes [FN#417] she said, "O Allah make this man my
goodman and deliver me from the evil of this hunchbacked groom." As
soon as they had made an end of this part of the ceremony they
dismissed the wedding guests who went forth, women, children and all,
and none remained save Hasan and the Hunchback, whilst the tirewomen
led the bride into an inner room to change her garb and gear and get
her ready for the bridegroom. Thereupon Quasimodo came up to Badr
al-Din Hasan and said, "O my lord, thou hast cheered us this night with
thy good company and overwhelmed us with thy kindness and courtesy; but
now why not get thee up and go?" "Bismallah," he answered, "In Allah's
name so be it!" and rising, he went forth by the door, where the Ifrit
met him and said, "Stay in thy stead, O Badr al-Din, and when the
Hunchback goes out to the closet of ease go in without losing time and
seat thyself in the alcove; and when the bride comes say to her, "'Tis
I am thy husband, for the King devised this trick only fearing for thee
the evil eye, and he whom thou sawest is but a Syce, a groom, one of
our stablemen.' Then walk boldly up to her and unveil her face; for
jealousy hath taken us of this matter." While Hasan was still talking
with the Ifrit behold, the groom fared forth from the hall and entering
the closet of ease sat down on the stool. Hardly had he done this when
the Ifrit came out of the tank, [FN#418] wherein the water was, in
semblance of a mouse and squeaked out "Zeek!" Quoth the Hunchback,
"What ails thee?"; and the mouse grew and grew till it became a
coal-black cat and caterwauled "Meeao! Meeao!"[FN#419] Then it grew
still more and more till it became a dog and barked out "Owh! Owh!"
When the bridegroom saw this he was frightened and exclaimed "Out with
thee, O unlucky one!" [FN#420] But the dog grew and swelled till it
became an ass-colt that brayed and snorted in his face "Hauk! Hauk!"
[FN#421] Whereupon the Hunchback quaked and cried, "Come to my aid, O
people of the house!" But behold, the ass-colt grew and became big as a
buffalo and walled the way before him and spake with the voice of the
sons of Adam, saying, "Woe to thee, O thou Bunch-back, thou stinkard, O
thou filthiest of grooms!" Hearing this the groom was seized with a
colic and he sat down on the jakes in his clothes with teeth chattering
and knocking together. Quoth the Ifrit, "Is the world so strait to thee
thou findest none to marry save my lady-love?" But as he was silent the
Ifrit continued, "Answer me or I will do thee dwell in the dust!" "By
Allah," replied the Gobbo, "O King of the Buffaloes, this is no fault
of mine, for they forced me to wed her; and verily I wot not that she
had a lover amongst the buffaloes; but now I repent, first before Allah
and then before thee." Said the Ifrit to him, "I swear to thee that if
thou fare forth from this place, or thou utter a word before sunrise, I
assuredly will wring thy neck. When the sun rises wend thy went and
never more return to this house." So saying, the Ifrit took up the
Gobbo bridegroom and set him head downwards and feet upwards in the
slit of the privy, [FN#422] and said to him, "I will leave thee here
but I shall be on the look-out for thee till sunrise; and, if thou stir
before then, I will seize thee by the feet and dash out thy brains
against the wall: so look out for thy life!" Thus far concerning the
Hunchback, but as regards Badr al-Din Hasan of Bassorah he left the
Gobbo and the Ifrit jangling and wrangling and, going into the house,
sat him down in the very middle of the alcove; and behold, in came the
bride attended by an old woman who stood at the door and said, "O
Father of Uprightness, [FN#423] arise and take what God giveth thee."
Then the old woman went away and the bride, Sitt al-Husn or the Lady of
Beauty hight, entered the inner part of the alcove broken-hearted and
saying in herself, "By Allah I will never yield my person to him; no,
not even were he to take my life!" But as she came to the further end
she saw Badr al-Din Hasan and she said, "Dearling! Art thou still
sitting here? By Allah I was wishing that thou wert my bridegroom or,
at least, that thou and the hunchbacked horse-groom were partners in
me." He replied, "O beautiful lady, how should the Syce have access to
thee, and how should he share in thee with me?" "Then," quoth she, "who
is my husband, thou or he?" "Sitt al-Husn," rejoined Hasan, "we have
not done this for mere fun, [FN#424] but only as a device to ward off
the evil eye from thee; for when the tirewomen and singers and wedding
guests saw thy beauty being displayed to me, they feared fascination
and thy father hired the horse-groom for ten dinars and a porringer of
meat to take the evil eye off us; and now he hath received his hire and
gone his gait." When the Lady of Beauty heard these words she smiled
and rejoiced and laughed a pleasant laugh. Then she whispered him, "By
the Lord thou hast quenched a fire which tortured me and now, by Allah,
O my little dark-haired darling, take me to thee and press me to thy
bosom!" Then she began singing:—

"By Allah, set thy foot upon my soul; * Since long, long years      for
this alone I long:
And whisper tale of love in ear of me; * To me 'tis sweeter than
the sweetest song!
No other youth upon my heart shall lie; * So do it often, dear,
and do it long."


Then she stripped off her outer gear and she threw open her chemise
from the neck downwards and showed her parts genital and all the
rondure of her hips. When Badr al-Din saw the glorious sight his
desires were roused, and he arose and doffed his clothes, and wrapping
up in his bag-trousers [FN#425] the purse of gold which he had taken
from the Jew and which contained the thousand dinars, he laid it under
the edge of the bedding. Then he took off his turband and set it upon
the settle [FN#426] atop of his other clothes, remaining in his
skull-cap and fine shirt of blue silk laced with gold. Whereupon the
Lady of Beauty drew him to her and he did likewise. Then he took her to
his embrace and set her legs round his waist and point-blanked that
cannon [FN#427] placed where it battereth down the bulwark of
maidenhead and layeth it waste. And he found her a pearl unpierced and
unthridden and a filly by all men save himself unridden; and he abated
her virginity and had joyance of her youth in his virility and
presently he withdrew sword from sheath; and then returned to the fray
right eath; and when the battle and the siege had finished, some
fifteen assaults he had furnished and she conceived by him that very
night. Then he laid his hand under her head and she did the same and
they embraced and fell asleep in each other's arms, as a certain poet
said of such lovers in these couplets:—

Visit thy lover, spurn what envy told; * No envious churl shall smile
on love ensoul'd.
Merciful Allah made no fairer sight * Than coupled lovers single couch
doth hold;
Breast pressing breast and robed in joys their own, * With pillowed
forearms cast in finest mould:
And when heart speaks to heart with tongue of love, * Folk who would
part them hammer steel ice-cold:
If a fair friend[FN#428] thou find who cleaves to thee, * Live for that
friend, that friend in heart enfold.
O ye who blame for love us lover kind * Say, can ye minister to
diseasèd mind?


This much concerning Badr al-Hasan and Sitt al-Husn his cousin; but as
regards the Ifrit, as soon as he saw the twain asleep, he said to the
Ifritah, "Arise, slip thee under the youth and let us carry him back to
his place ere dawn overtake us; for the day is nearhand." Thereupon she
came forward and, getting under him as he lay asleep, took him up clad
only in his fine blue shirt, leaving the rest of his garments; and
ceased not flying (and the Ifrit vying with her in flight) till the
dawn advised them that it had come upon them mid-way, and the Muezzin
began his call from the Minaret, "Haste ye to salvation! Haste ye to
salvation!" [FN#429] Then Allah suffered his angelic host to shoot down
the Ifrit with a shooting star, [FN#430] so he was consumed, but the
Ifritah escaped and she descended with Badr al-Din at the place where
the Ifrit was burnt, and did not carry him back to Bassorah, fearing
lest he come to harm. Now by the order of Him who predestineth all
things, they alighted at Damascus of Syria, and the Ifritah set down
her burden at one of the city-gates and flew away. When day arose and
the doors were opened, the folks who came forth saw a handsome youth,
with no other raiment but his blue shirt of gold-embroidered silk and
skull-cap,[FN#431] lying upon the ground drowned in sleep after the
hard labour of the night which had not suffered him to take his rest.
So the folk looking at him said, "O her luck with whom this one spent
the night! but would he had waited to don his garments." Quoth another,
"A sorry lot are the sons of great families! Haply he but now came
forth of the tavern on some occasion of his own and his wine flew to
his head,[FN#432] whereby he hath missed the place he was making for
and strayed till he came to the gate of the city; and finding it shut
lay him down and went to by-by!" As the people were bandying guesses
about him suddenly the morning breeze blew upon Badr al-Din and raising
his shirt to his middle showed a stomach and navel with something below
it, [FN#433] and legs and thighs clear as crystal and smooth as cream.
Cried the people, "By Allah he is a pretty fellow!"; and at the cry
Badr al-din awoke and found himself lying at a city-gate with a crowd
gathered around him. At this he greatly marvelled and asked, "Where am
I, O good folk; and what causeth you thus to gather round me, and what
have I had to do with you?"; and they answered, "We found thee lying
here asleep during the call to dawn-prayer and this is all we know of
the matter, but where diddest thou lie last night?" [FN#434] "By Allah,
O good people," replied he, "I lay last night in Cairo." Said somebody,
"Thou hast surely been eating Hashish," [FN#435] and another, "He is a
fool;" and a third, "He is a citrouille;" and a fourth asked him, "Art
thou out of thy mind? thou sleepest in Cairo and thou wakest in the
morning at the gate of Damascus-city!" [FN#436] Cried he, "By Allah, my
good people, one and all, I lie not to you: indeed I lay yesternight in
the land of Egypt and yesternoon I was at Bassorah." Quoth one, "Well!
well!"; and quoth another, "Ho! ho!"; and a third, "So! so!"; and a
fourth cried, "This youth is mad, is possessed of the Jinni!" So they
clapped hands at him and said to one another, "Alas, the pity of it for
his youth: by Allah a madman! and madness is no respecter of persons."
Then they said to him, "Collect thy wits and return to thy reason! How
couldest thou be in Bassorah yesterday and Cairo yesternight and withal
awake in Damascus this morning?" But he persisted, "Indeed I was a
bridegroom in Cairo last night." "Belike thou hast been dreaming,"
rejoined they, "and sawest all this in thy sleep." So Hasan took
thought for a while and said to them, "By Allah, this is no dream; nor
vision-like doth it seem! I certainly was in Cairo where they displayed
the bride before me, in presence of a third person, the Hunchback groom
who was sitting hard by. By Allah, O my brother, this be no dream, and
if it were a dream, where is the bag of gold I bore with me and where
are my turband and my robe, and my trousers?" Then he rose and entered
the city, threading its highways and by-ways and bazar-streets; and the
people pressed upon him and jeered at him, crying out "Madman! madman!"
till he, beside himself with rage, took refuge in a cook's shop. Now
that Cook had been a trifle too clever, that is, a rogue and thief; but
Allah had made him repent and turn from his evil ways and open a
cook-shop; and all the people of Damascus stood in fear of his boldness
and his mischief. So when the crowd saw the youth enter his shop, they
dispersed being afraid of him, and went their ways. The Cook looked at
Badr al-Din and, noting his beauty and loveliness, fell in love with
him forthright and said, "Whence comest thou, O youth? Tell me at once
thy tale, for thou art become dearer to me than my soul." So Hasan
recounted to him all that had befallen him from beginning to end (but
in repetition there is no fruition) and the Cook said, "O my lord Badr
al-Din, doubtless thou knowest that this case is wondrous and this
story marvellous; therefore, O my son, hide what hath betided thee,
till Allah dispel what ills be thine; and tarry with me here the
meanwhile, for I have no child and I will adopt thee." Badr al-Din
replied, "Be it as thou wilt, O my uncle!" Whereupon the Cook went to
the bazar and bought him a fine suit of clothes and made him don it;
then fared with him to the Kazi, and formally declared that he was his
son. So Badr al-Din Hasan became known in Damascus-city as the Cook's
son and he sat with him in the shop to take the silver, and on this
wise he sojourned there for a time. Thus far concerning him; but as
regards his cousin, the Lady of Beauty, when morning dawned she awoke
and missed Badr al-Din Hasan from her side; but she thought that he had
gone to the privy and she sat expecting him for an hour or so; when
behold, entered her father Shams al-Din Mohammed, Wazir of Egypt. Now
he was disconsolate by reason of what had befallen him through the
Sultan, who had entreated him harshly and had married his daughter by
force to the lowest of his menials and he too a lump of a groom
bunch-backed withal, and he said to himself, "I will slay this daughter
of mine if of her own free will she have yielded her person to this
accursed carle." So he came to the door of the bride's private chamber
and said, "Ho! Sitt al-Husn." She answered him, "Here am I! here am I!"
[FN#437] O my lord," and came out unsteady of gait after the pains and
pleasures of the night; and she kissed his hand, her face showing
redoubled brightness and beauty for having lain in the arms of that
gazelle, her cousin. When her father, the Wazir, saw her in such case,
he asked her, "O thou accursed, art thou rejoicing because of this
horse-groom?", and Sitt al-Husn smiled sweetly and answered, "By Allah,
don't ridicule me: enough of what passed yesterday when folk laughed at
me, and evened me with that groom-fellow who is not worthy to bring my
husband's shoes or slippers; nay who is not worth the paring of my
husband's nails! By the Lord, never in my life have I nighted a night
so sweet as yesternight!, so don't mock by reminding me of the Gobbo."
When her parent heard her words he was filled with fury, and his eyes
glared and stared, so that little of them showed save the whites and he
cried, "Fie upon thee! What words are these? 'Twas the hunchbacked
horse-groom who passed the night with thee!" "Allah upon thee," replied
the Lady of Beauty, "do not worry me about the Gobbo, Allah damn his
father; [FN#438] and leave jesting with me; for this groom was only
hired for ten dinars and a porringer of meat and he took his wage and
went his way. As for me I entered the bridal-chamber, where I found my
true bridegroom sitting, after the singer-women had displayed me to
him; the same who had crossed their hands with red gold, till every
pauper that was present waxed wealthy; and I passed the night on the
breast of my bonny man, a most lively darling, with his black eyes and
joined eyebrows." [FN#439] When her parent heard these words the light
before his face became night, and he cried out at her saying, "O thou
whore! What is this thou tellest me? Where be thy wits?" "O my father,"
she rejoined, "thou breakest my heart; enough for thee that thou hast
been so hard upon me! Indeed my husband who took my virginity is but
just now gone to the draught-house and I feel that I have conceived by
him." [FN#440] The Wazir rose in much marvel and entered the privy
where he found the hunchbacked groom with his head in the hole, and his
heels in the air. At this sight he was confounded and said, "This is
none other than he, the rascal Hunchback!" So he called to him, "Ho
Hunchback!" The Gobbo grunted out, "Taghum! Taghum!" [FN#441] thinking
it was the Ifrit spoke to him; so the Wazir shouted at him and said,
"Speak out, or I'll strike off thy pate with this sword." Then quoth
the Hunchback, "By Allah, O Shaykh of the Ifrits, ever since thou
settest me in this place, I have not lifted my head; so Allah upon
thee, take pity and entreat me kindly!" When the Wazir heard this he
asked, "What is this thou sayest? I'm the bride's father and no Ifrit."
"Enough for thee that thou hast well nigh done me die, " answered
Quasimodo; "now go thy ways before he come upon thee who hath served me
thus. Could ye not marry me to any save the lady-love of buffaloes and
the beloved of Ifrits? Allah curse her and curse him who married me to
her and was the cause of this my case,"—And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day, and ceased to say her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-third Night,


Said she, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the hunchbacked
groom spake to the bride's father saying, "Allah curse him who was the
cause of this my case!" Then said the Wazir to him, "Up and out of this
place!" "Am I mad," cried the groom, "that I should go with thee
without leave of the Ifrit whose last words to me were:—"When the sun
rises, arise and go thy gait." So hath the sun risen or no?; for I dare
not budge from this place till then." Asked the Wazir, "Who brought
thee hither?"; and he answered "I came here yesternight for a call of
nature and to do what none can do for me, when lo! a mouse came out of
the water, and squeaked at me and swelled and waxed gross till it was
big as a buffalo, and spoke to me words that entered my ears. Then he
left me here and went away, Allah curse the bride and him who married
me to her!" The Wazir walked up to him and lifted his head out of the
cesspool hole; and he fared forth running for dear life and hardly
crediting that the sun had risen; and repaired to the Sultan to whom he
told all that had befallen him with the Ifrit. But the Wazir returned
to the bride's private chamber, sore troubled in spirit about her, and
said to her, "O my daughter, explain this strange matter to me!" Quoth
she, "Tis simply this. The bridegroom to whom they displayed me
yestereve lay with me all night, and took my virginity and I am with
child by him. He is my husband and if thou believe me not, there are
his turband, twisted as it was, lying on the settle and his dagger and
his trousers beneath the bed with a something, I wot not what, wrapped
up in them." When her father heard this he entered the private chamber
and found the turband which had been left there by Badr al-Din Hasan,
his brother's son, and he took it in hand and turned it over, saying,
"This is the turband worn by Wazirs, save that it is of Mosul stuff."
[FN#442] So he opened it and, finding what seemed to be an amulet sewn
up in the Fez, he unsewed the lining and took it out; then he lifted up
the trousers wherein was the purse of the thousand gold pieces and,
opening that also, found in it a written paper. This he read and it was
the sale-receipt of the Jew in the name of Badr al-Din Hasan, son of
Nur al-Din Ali, the Egyptian; and the thousand dinars were also there.
No sooner had Shams al-Din read this than he cried out with a loud cry
and fell to the ground fainting; and as soon as he revived and
understood the gist of the matter he marvelled and said, "There is no
God, but _the_ God, whose All-might is over all things! Knowest thou, O
my daughter, who it was that became the husband of thy virginity?"
"No," answered she, and he said, "Verily he is the son of my brother,
thy cousin, and this thousand dinars is thy dowry. Praise be to Allah!
and would I wot how this matter came about!" then opened he the amulet
which was sewn up and found therein a paper in the handwriting of his
deceased brother, Nur al-Din the Egyptian, father of Badr al-Din Hasan;
and, when he saw the hand-writing, he kissed it again and again; and he
wept and wailed over his dead brother and improvised this lines:—

"I see their traces and with pain I melt, * And on their whilome homes
I weep and yearn:
And Him I pray who dealt this parting-blow * Some day he deign
vouchsafe a safe return." [FN#443]


When he ceased versifying, he read the scroll and found in it recorded
the dates of his brother's marriage with the daughter of the Wazir of
Bassorah, and of his going in to her, and her conception, and the birth
of Badr al-Din Hasan and all his brother's history and doings up to his
dying day. So he marvelled much and shook with joy and, comparing the
dates with his own marriage and going in to his wife and the birth of
their daughter, Sitt al-Husn, he found that they perfectly agreed. So
he took the document and, repairing with it to the Sultan, acquainted
him with what had passed, from first to last; whereat the King
marvelled and commanded the case to be at once recorded. [FN#444] The
Wazir abode that day expecting to see his brother's son but he came
not; and he waited a second day, a third day and so on to the seventh
day, without any tidings of him. So he said, "By Allah, I will do a
deed such as none hath ever done before me!"; and he took reed-pen and
ink and drew upon a sheet of paper the plan of the whole house, showing
whereabouts was the private chamber with the curtain in such a place
and the furniture in such another and so on with all that was in the
room. Then he folded up the sketch and, causing all the furniture to be
collected, he took Badr al-Din's garments and the turband and Fez and
robe and purse, and carried the whole to his house and locked them up,
against the coming of his nephew, Badr al-Din Hasan, the son of his
lost brother, with an iron padlock on which he set his seal. As for the
Wazir's daughter, when her tale of months was fulfilled, she bare a son
like the full moon, the image of his father in beauty and loveliness
and fair proportions and perfect grace. They cut his navel-string
[FN#445] and Kohl'd his eyelids to strengthen his eyes, and gave him
over to the nurses and nursery governesses, [FN#446] naming him Ajib,
the Wonderful. His day was as a month and his month was as a year;
[FN#447] and, when seven years had passed over him, his grandfather
sent him to school, enjoining the master to teach him Koran-reading,
and to educate him well. he remained at the school four years, till he
began to bully his schoolfellows and abuse them and bash them and
thrash them and say, "Who among you is like me? I am the son of Wazir
of Egypt!" At last the boys came in a body to complain to the Monitor
[FN#448] of what hard usage they were wont to have from Ajib, and he
said to them, "I will tell you somewhat you may do to him so that he
shall leave off coming to the school, and it is this. When he enters
to-morrow, sit ye down about him and say some one of you to some other,
'By Allah none shall play with us at this game except he tell us the
names of his mamma and his papa; for he who knows not the names of his
mother and his father is a bastard, a son of adultery, [FN#449] and he
shall not play with us.'" When morning dawned the boys came to school,
Ajib being one of them, and all flocked around him saying, "We will
play a game wherein none can join save he can tell the name of his
mamma and his papa." And they all cried, "By Allah, good!" Then quoth
one of them, "My name is Majid and my mammy's name is Alawiyah and my
daddy's Izz al-Din." Another spoke in like guise and yet a third, till
Ajid's turn came, and he said, "MY name is Ajib, and my mother's is
Sitt al-Husn, and my father's Shams al-Din, the Wazir of Cairo." "By
Allah," cried they, "the Wazir is not thy true father." Ajib answered,
"The Wazir is my father in very deed." Then the boys all laughed and
clapped their hands at him, saying "He does not know who is his papa:
get out from among us, for none shall play with us except he know his
father's name." Thereupon they dispersed from around him and laughed
him to scorn; so his breast was straitened and he well nigh choked with
tears and hurt feelings. Then said the Monitor to him, "We know that
the Wazir is thy grandfather, the father of thy mother, Sitt al-Husn,
and not thy father. As for thy father, neither dost thou know him nor
yet do we; for the Sultan married thy mother to the hunchbacked
horse-groom; but the Jinni came and slept with her and thou hast no
known father. Leave, then, comparing thyself too advantageously with
the little ones of the school, till thou know that thou hast a lawful
father; for until then thou wilt pass for a child of adultery amongst
them. Seest thou not that even a huckster's son knoweth his own sire?
Thy grandfather is the Wazir of Egypt; but as for thy father we wot him
not and we say indeed that thou hast none. So return to thy sound
senses!" When Ajib heard these insulting words from the Monitor and the
school boys and understood the reproach they put upon him, he went out
at once and ran to his mother, Sitt al-Husn, to complain; but he was
crying so bitterly that his tears prevented his speech for a while.
When she heard his sobs and saw his tears her heart burned as though
with fire for him, and she said, "O my son, why dost thou weep? Allah
keep the tears from thine eyes! Tell me what hath betided thee?" So he
told her all that he heard from the boys and from the Monitor and ended
with asking, "And who, O my mother, is my father?" She answered, "Thy
father is the Wazir of Egypt;" but he said, "Do not lie to me. The
Wazir is thy father, not mine! who then is my father? Except thou tell
me the very truth I will kill myself with this hanger." [FN#450] When
his mother heard him speak of his father she wept, remembering her
cousin and her bridal night with him and all that occurred there and
then, and she repeated these couplets:—

"Love in my heart they lit and went their ways, * And all I love to
furthest lands withdrew;
And when they left me sufferance also left, * And when we parted
Patience bade adieu:
They fled and flying with my joys they fled, * In very constancy my
spirit flew:
They made my eyelids flow with severance tears * And to the
parting-pang these drops are due:
And when I long to see reunion-day, * My groans prolonging sore for
ruth I sue:
Then in my heart of hearts their shapes I trace, * And love and longing
care and cark renew:
O ye, whose names cling round me like a cloak, * Whose love yet closer
than a shirt I drew,
Beloved ones! how long this hard despite? * How long this severance and
this coy shy flight?"


Then she wailed and shrieked aloud and her son did the like; and
behold, in came the Wazir whose heart burnt within him at the sight of
their lamentations, and he said, "What makes you weep?" So the Lady of
Beauty acquainted him with what had happened between her son and the
school boys; and he also wept, calling to mind his brother and what had
past between them and what had betided his daughter and how he had
failed to find out what mystery there was in the matter. Then he rose
at once and, repairing to the audience-hall, went straight to the King
and told his tale and craved his permission [FN#451] to travel eastward
to the city of Bassorah and ask after his brother's son. Furthermore,
he besought the Sultan to write for him letters patent, authorising him
to seize upon Badr al-Din, his nephew and son-in-law, wheresoever he
might find him. And he wept before the King, who had pity on him and
wrote royal autographs to his deputies in all climes [FN#452] and
countries and cities; whereat the Wazir rejoiced and prayed for
blessings on him. Then, taking leave of his Sovereign, he returned to
his house, where he equipped himself and his daughter and his adopted
child Ajib, with all things meet for a long march; and set out and
travelled the first day and the second and the third and so forth till
he arrived at Damascus-city. He found it a fair place abounding in
trees and streams, even as the poet said of it:—

When I nighted and dayed in Damascus town, * Time sware such another he
ne'er should view:
And careless we slept under wing of night, * Till dappled Morn 'gan her
smiles renew:
And dew-drops on branch in their beauty hung, * Like pearls to be dropt
when the Zephyr blew:
And the Lake [FN#453] was the page where birds read and note, * And the
clouds set points to what breezes wrote.


The Wazir encamped on the open space called Al-Hasa; [FN#454] and,
after pitching tents, said to his servants, "A halt here for two days!"
So they went into the city upon their several occasions, this to sell
and that to buy; this to go to the Hammam and that to visit the
Cathedral-mosque of the Banu Umayyah, the Ommiades, whose like is not
in this world. [FN#455] Ajib also went, with his attendant eunuch, for
solace and diversion to the city and the servant followed with a
quarter-staff [FN#456] of almond-wood so heavy that if he struck a
camel therewith the beast would never rise again. [FN#457] When the
people of Damascus saw Ajib's beauty and brilliancy and perfect grace
and symmetry (for he was a marvel of comeliness and winning loveliness,
softer than the cool breeze of the North, sweeter than limpid waters to
a man in drowth, and pleasanter than the health for which sick man
sueth), a mighty many followed him, whilst others ran on before, and
sat down on the road until he should come up, that they might gaze on
him, till, as Destiny had decreed, the Eunuch stopped opposite the shop
of Ajib's father, Badr al-Din Hasan. Now his beard had grown long and
thick and his wits had ripened during the twelve years which had passed
over him, and the Cook and ex-rogue having died, the so-called Hasan of
Bassorah had succeeded to his goods and shop, for that he had been
formally adopted before the Kazi and witnesses. When his son and the
Eunuch stepped before him he gazed on Ajib and, seeing how very
beautiful he was, his heart fluttered and throbbed, and blood drew to
blood and natural affection spake out and his bowels yearned over him.
He had just dressed a conserve of pomegranate-grains with sugar, and
Heaven-implanted love wrought within him; so he called to his son Ajib
and said, "O my lord, O thou who hast gotten the mastery of my heart
and my very vitals and to whom my bowels yearn; say me, wilt thou enter
my house and solace my soul by eating of my meat?" Then his eyes
streamed with tears which he could not stay, for he bethought him of
what he had been and what he had become. When Ajib heard his father's
words his heart also yearned himwards and he looked at the Eunuch and
said to him, "Of a truth, O my good guard, my heart yearns to this
cook; he is as one that hath a son far away from him: so let us enter
and gladden his heart by tasting of his hospitality. Perchance for our
so doing Allah may reunite me with my father." When the Eunuch heard
these words he cried, "A fine thing this, by Allah! Shall the sons of
Wazirs be seen eating in a common cook-shop? Indeed I keep off the folk
from thee with this quarter-staff lest they even look upon thee; and I
dare not suffer thee to enter this shop at all." When Hasan of Bassorah
heard his speech he marvelled and turned to the Eunuch with the tears
pouring down his cheeks; and Ajib said, "Verily my heart loves him!"
But he answered, "Leave this talk, thou shalt not go in." Thereupon the
father turned to the Eunuch and said, "O worthy sir, why wilt thou not
gladden my soul by entering my shop? O thou who art like a chestnut,
dark without but white of heart within! O thou of the like of whom a
certain poet said * * *" The Eunuch burst out a-laughing and
asked—"Said what? Speak out by Allah and be quick about it." So Hasan
the Bassorite began reciting these couplets:—

"If not master of manners or aught but discreet * In the household of
Kings no trust could he take:
And then for the Harem! what Eunuch [FN#458] is he * Whom angels would
serve for his service sake."


The Eunuch marvelled and was pleased at these words, so he took Ajib by
the hand and went into the cook's shop: whereupon Hasan the Bassorite
ladled into a saucer some conserve of pomegranate-grains wonderfully
good, dressed with almonds and sugar, saying, "You have honoured me
with your company: eat then and health and happiness to you!" Thereupon
Ajib said to his father, "Sit thee down and eat with us; so perchance
Allah may unite us with him we long for." Quoth Hasan, "O my son, hast
thou then been afflicted in thy tender years with parting from those
thou lovest?" Quoth Ajib, "Even so, O nuncle mine; my heart burns for
the loss of a beloved one who is none other than my father; and indeed
I come forth, I and my grandfather, [FN#459] to circle and search the
world for him. Oh, the pity of it, and how I long to meet him!" Then he
wept with exceeding weeping, and his father also wept seeing him weep
and for his own bereavement, which recalled to him his long separation
from dear friends and from his mother; and the Eunuch was moved to pity
for him. Then they ate together till they were satisfied; and Ajib and
the slave rose and left the shop. Hereat Hasan the Bassorite felt as
though his soul had departed his body and had gone with them; for he
could not lose sight of the boy during the twinkling of an eye, albeit
he knew not that Ajib was his son. So he locked up his shop and
hastened after them; and he walked so fast that he came up with them
before they had gone out of the western gate. The Eunuch turned and
asked him, "What ails the?"; and Badr al-Din answered, "When ye went
from me, meseemed my soul had gone with you; and, as I had business
without the city-gate, I purposed to bear you company till my matter
was ordered and so return." The Eunuch was angered and said to Ajib,
"This is just what I feared! we ate that unlucky mouthful (which we are
bound to respect), and here is the fellow following us from place to
place; for the vulgar are ever the vulgar." Ajib, turning and seeing
the Cook just behind him, was wroth and his face reddened with rage and
he said to the servant; "Let him walk the highway of the Moslems; but,
when we turn off it to our tents, and find that he still follows us, we
will send him about his business with a flea in his ear." Then he bowed
his head and walked on, the Eunuch walking behind him. But Hasan of
Bassorah followed them to the plain Al-Hasa; and, as they drew near to
the tents, they turned round and saw him close on their heels; so Ajib
was very angry, fearing that the Eunuch might tell his grandfather what
had happened. His indignation was the hotter for apprehension lest any
say that after he had entered a cook-shop the cook had followed him. So
he turned and looked at Hasan of Bassorah and found his eyes fixed on
his own, for the father had become a body without a soul; and it seemed
to Ajib that his eye was a treacherous eye or that he was some lewd
fellow. So his rage redoubled and, stooping down, he took up a stone
weighing half a pound and threw it at his father. It struck him on the
forehead, cutting it open from eye-brow to eye-brow and causing the
blood to stream down: and Hasan fell to the ground in a swoon whilst
Ajib and the Eunuch made for the tents. When the father came to himself
he wiped away the blood and tore off a strip from his turband and bound
up his head, blaming himself the while, and saying, "I wronged the lad
by shutting up my shop and following, so that he thought I was some
evil-minded fellow." Then he returned to his place where he busied
himself with the sale of his sweetmeats; and he yearned after his
mother at Bassorah, and wept over her and broke out repeating:—

"Unjust it were to bid the World [FN#460] be just * And blame her not:
She ne'er was made for justice:
Take what she gives thee, leave all grief aside, * For now to fair and
then to foul her lust is."


So Hasan of Bassorah set himself steadily to sell his sweetmeats; but
the Wazir, his uncle, halted in Damascus three days and then marched
upon Emesa, and passing through that town he made enquiry there and at
every place where he rested. Thence he fared on by way of Hamah and
Aleppo and thence through Diyár Bakr and Maridin and Mosul, still
enquiring, till he arrived at Bassorah-city. Here, as soon as he had
secured a lodging, he presented himself before the Sultan, who
entreated him with high honour and the respect due to his rank, and
asked the cause of his coming. The Wazir acquainted him with his
history and told him that the Minister Nur al-Din was his brother;
whereupon the Sultan exclaimed, "Allah have mercy upon him!" and added,
"My good Sahib!" [FN#461]; he was my Wazir for fifteen years and I
loved him exceedingly. Then he died leaving a son who abode only a
single month after his father's death; since which time he has
disappeared and we could gain no tidings of him. But his mother, who is
the daughter of my former Minister, is still among us." When the Wazir
Shams al-Din heard that his nephew's mother was alive and well, he
rejoiced and said, "O King I much desire to meet her." The King on the
instant gave him leave to visit her; so he betook himself to the
mansion of his brother, Nur al-Din, and cast sorrowful glances on all
things in and around it and kissed the threshold. Then he bethought him
of his brother, Nur al-Din Ali, and how he had died in a strange land
far from kith and kin and friends; and he wept and repeated these
lines:—

"I wander 'mid these walls, my Layla's walls, * And kissing this and
other wall I roam:
'Tis not the walls or roof my heart so loves, * But those who in this
house had made their home."


Then he passed through the gate into a courtyard and found a vaulted
doorway builded of hardest syenite [FN#462] inlaid with sundry kinds of
multi-coloured marble. Into this he walked and wandered about the house
and, throwing many a glance around, saw the name of his brother, Nur
al-Din, written in gold wash upon the walls. So he went up to the
inscription and kissed it and wept and thought of how he had been
separated from his brother and had now lost him for ever, and he
recited these couplets:—

"I ask of you from every rising sun, * And eke I ask when flasheth
levenlight:
Restless I pass my nights in passion-pain, * Yet ne'er I 'plain me of
my painful plight;
My love! if longer last this parting throe * Little by little shall it
waste my sprite.
An thou wouldst bless these eyne with sight of thee * One day on earth,
I crave none other sight:
Think not another could possess my mind * Nor length nor breadth for
other love I find."


Then he walked on till he came to the apartment of his brother's widow,
the mother of Badr al-Din Hasan, the Egyptian. Now from the time of her
son's disappearance she had never ceased weeping and wailing through
the light hours and the dark; and, when the years grew longsome with
her, she built for him a tomb of marble in the midst of the saloon and
there used to weep for him day and night, never sleeping save thereby.
When the Wazir drew near her apartment, he heard her voice and stood
behind the door while she addressed the sepulchre in verse and said:—

"Answer, by Allah! Sepulchre, are all his beauties gone? * Hath change
the power to blight his charms, that Beauty's paragon?
Thou art not earth, O Sepulchre! nor art thou sky to me; * How comes
it, then, in thee I see conjoint the branch and moon?"


While she was bemoaning herself after this fashion, behold, the Wazir
went in to her and saluted her and informed her that he was her
husband's brother; and, telling her all that had passed between them,
laid open before her the whole story, how her son Badr al-Din Hasan had
spent a whole night with his daughter full ten years ago but had
disappeared in the morning. And he ended with saying, "My daughter
conceived by thy son and bare a male child who is now with me, and he
is thy son and thy son's son by my daughter." When she heard the
tidings that her boy, Badr al-Din, was still alive and saw her
brother-in-law, she rose up to him and threw herself at his feet and
kissed them, reciting these lines:—

"Allah be good to him that gives glad tidings of thy steps; * In very
sooth for better news mine ears would never sue:
Were he content with worn-out robe, upon his back I'd throw * A heart
to pieces rent and torn when heard the word Adieu."


Then the Wazir sent for Ajib and his grandmother stood up and fell on
his neck and wept; but Shams al-Din said to her, "This is no time for
weeping; this is the time to get thee ready for travelling with us to
the land of Egypt; haply Allah will reunite me and thee with thy son
and my nephew." Replied she, "Hearkening and obedience;" and, rising at
once, collected her baggage and treasures and her jewels, and equipped
herself and her slave-girls for the march, whilst the Wazir went to
take his leave of the Sultan of Bassorah, who sent by him presents and
rarities for the Soldan of Egypt. Then he set out at once upon his
homeward march and journeyed till he came to Damascus-city where he
alighted in the usual place and pitched tents, and said to his suite,
"We will halt a se'nnight here to buy presents and rare things for the
Soldan." Now Ajib bethought him of the past so he said to the Eunuch,
"O Laik, I want a little diversion; come, let us go down to the great
bazar of Damascus, [FN#463] and see what hath become of the cook whose
sweetmeats we ate and whose head we broke, for indeed he was kind to us
and we entreated him scurvily." The Eunuch answered, "Hearing is
obeying!" So they went forth from the tents; and the tie of blood drew
Ajib towards his father, and forthwith they passed through the gateway,
Bab al-Faradis [FN#464] hight, and entered the city and ceased not
walking through the streets till they reached the cookshop, where they
found Hasan of Bassorah standing at the door. It was near the time of
mid-afternoon prayer [FN#465] and it so fortuned that he had just
dressed a confection of pomegranate-grains. When the twain drew near to
him and Ajib saw him, his heart yearned towards him, and noticing the
scar of the blow, which time had darkened on his brow, he said to him,
"Peace be on thee, O man!" [FN#466] know that my heart is with thee."
But when Badr al-Din looked upon his son his vitals yearned and his
heart fluttered, and he hung his head earthwards and sought to make his
tongue give utterance to his words, but he could not. Then he raised
his head humbly and suppliant-wise towards his boy and repeated these
couplets:—

"I longed for my beloved but when I saw his face, * Abashed I held my
tongue and stood with downcast eye;
And hung my head in dread and would have hid my love, * But do whatso I
would hidden it would not lie;
Volumes of plaints I had prepared, reproach and blame, * But when we
met, no single word remembered I."


And then said he to them, "Heal my broken heart and eat of my
sweetmeats; for, by Allah, I cannot look at thee but my heart flutters.
Indeed I should not have followed thee the other day, but that I was
beside myself." "By Allah," answered Ajib, "thou dost indeed love us!
We ate in thy house a mouthful when we were here before and thou madest
us repent of it, for that thou followedst us and wouldst have disgraced
us; so now we will not eat aught with thee save on condition that thou
make oath not to go out after us nor dog us. Otherwise we will not
visit thee again during our present stay; for we shall halt a week
here, whilst my grandfather buys certain presents for the King." Quoth
Hasan of Bassorah, "I promise you this." So Ajib and the Eunuch entered
the shop, and his father set before them a saucer-full of conserve of
pomegranate-grains. Said Ajib, "Sit thee down and eat with us, so haply
shall Allah dispel our sorrows." Hasan the Bassorite was joyful and sat
down and ate with them; but his eyes kept gazing fixedly on Ajib's
face, for his very heart and vitals clove to him; and at last the boy
said to him, "Did I not tell thee thou art a most noyous dotard?; so do
stint thy staring in my face!" But when Hasan of Bassorah heard his
son's words he repeated these lines:—

"Thou hast some art the hearts of men to clip; * Close-veiled,
far-hidden mystery dark and deep:
O thou whose beauties shame the lustrous moon, * Wherewith the saffron
Morn fears rivalship!
Thy beauty is a shrine shall ne'er decay; * Whose signs shall grow
until they all outstrip; [FN#467]
Must I be thirst-burnt by that Eden-brow * And die of pine to taste
that Kausar-lip?" [FN#468]


Hasan kept putting morsels into Ajib's mouth at one time and at another
time did the same by the Eunuch and they ate till they were satisfied
and could no more. Then all rose up and the cook poured water on their
hands; [FN#469] and, loosing a silken waist-shawl, dried them and
sprinkled them with rose-water from a casting-bottle he had by him.
Then he went out and presently returned with a gugglet of sherbet
flavoured with rose-water, scented with musk and cooled with snow; and
he set this before them saying, "Complete your kindness to me!" So Ajib
took the gugglet and drank and passed it to the Eunuch; and it went
round till their stomachs were full and they were surfeited with a meal
larger than their wont. Then they went away and made haste in walking
till they reached the tents, and Ajib went in to his grandmother, who
kissed him and, thinking of her son, Badr al-Din Hasan, groaned aloud
and wept and recited these lines:—

"I still had hoped to see thee and enjoy thy sight, * For in thine
absence life has lost its kindly light:
I swear my vitals wot none other love but thine * By Allah, who can
read the secrets of the sprite!"


Then she asked Ajib, "O my son! where hast thou been?"; and he
answered, "In Damascus-city;" Whereupon she rose and set before him a
bit of scone and a saucer of conserve of pomegranate-grains (which was
too little sweetened), and she said to the Eunuch, "Sit down with thy
master!" Said the servant to himself, "By Allah, we have no mind to
eat: I cannot bear the smell of bread;" but he sat down and so did
Ajib, though his stomach was full of what he had eaten already and
drunken. Nevertheless he took a bit of the bread and dipped it in the
pomegranate-conserve and made shift to eat it, but he found it too
little sweetened, for he was cloyed and surfeited, so he said, "Faugh;
what be this wild-beast [FN#470] stuff?" "O my son," cried his
grandmother, "dost thou find fault with my cookery? I cooked this
myself and none can cook it as nicely as I can save thy father, Badr
al-Din Hasan." "By Allah, O my lady, Ajib answered, "this dish is nasty
stuff; for we saw but now in the city of Bassorah a cook who so
dresseth pomegranate-grains that the very smell openeth a way to the
heart and the taste would make a full man long to eat; and, as for this
mess compared with his, 'tis not worth either much or little." When his
grandmother heard his words she waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and
looked at the servant—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-fourth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ajib's
grandmother heard his words, she waxed wroth and looked at the servant
and said, "Woe to thee! dost thou spoil my son, [FN#471] and dost take
him into common cookshops?" The Eunuch was frightened and denied,
saying, "We did not go into the shop; we only passed by it." "By
Allah," cried Ajib, "but we did go in and we ate till it came out of
our nostrils, and the dish was better than thy dish!" Then his
grandmother rose and went and told her brother-in-law, who was incensed
against the Eunuch, and sending for him asked him, "Why didst thou take
my son into a cookshop?"; and the Eunuch being frightened answered, "We
did not go in." But Ajib said, "We did go inside and ate conserve of
pomegranate-grains till we were full; and the cook gave us to drink of
iced and sugared sherbet." At this the Wazir's indignation redoubled
and he questioned the Castrato but, as he still denied, the Wazir said
to him, "If thou speak sooth, sit down and eat before us." So he came
forward and tried to eat, but could not and threw away the mouthful
crying "O my lord! I am surfeited since yesterday." By this the Wazir
was certified that he had eaten at the cook's and bade the slaves throw
him [FN#472] which they did. Then they came down on him with a
rib-basting which burned him till he cried for mercy and help from
Allah, saying, "O my master, beat me no more and I will tell thee the
truth;" whereupon the Wazir stopped the bastinado and said, "Now speak
thou sooth." Quoth the Eunuch, "Know then that we did enter the shop of
a cook while he was dressing conserve of pomegranate-grains and he set
some of it before us: by Allah! I never ate in my life its like, nor
tasted aught nastier than this stuff which is now before us."[FN#473]
Badr al-Din Hasan's mother was angry at this and said, "Needs thou must
go back to the cook and bring me a saucer of conserved
pomegranate-grains from that which is in his shop and show it to thy
master, that he may say which be the better and the nicer, mine or
his." Said the unsexed, "I will." So on the instant she gave him a
saucer and a half dinar and he returned to the shop and said to the
cook, "O Shaykh of all Cooks, [FN#474] we have laid a wager concerning
thy cookery in my lord's house, for they have conserve of
pomegranate-grains there also; so give me this half-dinar's worth and
look to it; for I have eaten a full meal of stick on account of thy
cookery, and so do not let me eat aught more thereof." Hasan of
Bassorah laughed and answered, "By Allah, none can dress this dish as
it should be dressed save myself and my mother, and she at this time is
in a far country." Then he ladled out a saucer-full; and, finishing it
off with musk and rose-water, put it in a cloth which he sealed
[FN#475] and gave it to the Eunuch, who hastened back with it. No
sooner had Badr al-Din Hasan's mother tasted it and perceived its fine
flavour and the excellence of the cookery, than she knew who had
dressed it, and she screamed and fell down fainting. The Wazir, sorely
started, sprinkled rose-water upon her and after a time she recovered
and said, "If my son be yet of this world, none dressed this conserve
of pomegranate-grains but he; and this Cook is my very son Badr al-Din
Hasan; there is no doubt of it nor can there be any mistake, for only I
and he knew how to prepare it and I taught him." When the Wazir heard
her words he joyed with exceeding joy and said, "O the longing of me
for a sight of my brother's son! I wonder if the days will ever unite
us with him! Yet it is to Almighty Allah alone that we look for
bringing about this meeting." Then he rose without stay or delay and,
going to his suite said to them, "Be off, some fifty of you with sticks
and staves to the Cook's shop and demolish it; then pinion his arms
behind him with his own turband, saying, 'It was thou madest that foul
mess of pomegranate-grains!' and drag him here perforce but without
doing him a harm." And they replied, "It is well." Then the Wazir rode
off without losing an instant to the Palace and, foregathering with the
Viceroy of Damascus, showed him the Sultan's orders. After careful
perusal he kissed the letter, and placing it upon his head said to his
visitor, "Who is this offender of thine?" Quoth the Wazir, "A man who
is a cook." So the Viceroy at once sent his apparitors to the shop;
which they found demolished and everything in it broken to pieces; for
whilst the Wazir was riding to the palace his men had done his bidding.
Then they awaited his return from the audience, and Hasan of Bassorah
who was their prisoner kept saying, "I wonder what they have found in
the conserve of pomegranate-grains to bring things to this pass!"
[FN#476] When the Wazir returned to them, after his visit to the
Viceroy who had given him formal permission to take up his debtor and
depart with him, on entering the tents he called for the Cook. They
brought him forward pinioned with his turband; and, when Badr al-Din
Hasan saw his uncle, he wept with excessive weeping and said, "O my
lord, what is my offence against thee?" "Art thou the man who dressed
that conserve of pomegranate-grains?"; asked the Wazir, and he answered
"Yes! didst thou find in it aught to call for the cutting off of my
head?" Quoth the Wazir, "That were the least of thy deserts!" Quoth the
cook, "O my lord, wilt thou not tell me my crime and what aileth the
conserve of pomegranate-grains?" "Presently," replied the Wazir and
called aloud to his men, saying "Bring hither the camels." So they
struck the tents and by the Wazir's orders the servants took Badr
al-Din Hasan, and set him in a chest which they padlocked and put on a
camel. Then they departed and stinted not journeying till nightfall,
when they halted and ate some victual, and took Badr al-Din Hasan out
of his chest and gave him a meal and locked him up again. They set out
once more and travelled till they reached Kimrah, where they took him
out of the box and brought him before the Wazir who asked him, "Art
thou he who dressed that conserve of pomegranate-grains?" He answered
"Yes, O my lord!"; and the Wazir said "Fetter him!" So they fettered
him and returned him to the chest and fared on again till they reached
Cairo and lighted at the quarter called Al-Raydaniyah.[FN#477] Then the
Wazir gave order to take Badr al-Din Hasan out of the chest and sent
for a carpenter and said to him, "Make me a cross of wood [FN#478] for
this fellow!" Cried Badr al-Din Hasan "And what wilt thou do with it?";
and the Wazir replied, "I mean to crucify thee thereon, and nail thee
thereto and parade thee all about the city." "And why wilt thou use me
after this fashion?" "Because of thy villanous cookery of conserved
pomegranate-grains; how durst thou dress it and sell it lacking
pepper?" "And for that it lacked pepper wilt thou do all this to me? Is
it not enough that thou hast broken my shop and smashed my gear and
boxed me up in a chest and fed me only once a day?" "Too little pepper!
too little pepper! this is a crime which can be expiated only upon the
cross!" Then Badr al-Din Hasan marvelled and fell a-mourning for his
life; whereupon the Wazir asked him, "Of what thinkest thou?"; and he
answered him, "Of maggoty heads like thine; [FN#479] for an thou had
one ounce of sense thou hadst not treated me thus." Quoth the Wazir,
"It is our duty to punish thee lest thou do the like again." Quoth Badr
al-Din Hasan, "Of a truth my offense were over-punished by the least of
what thou hast already done to me; and Allah damn all conserve of
pomegranate-grains and curse the hour when I cooked it and would I had
died ere this!" But the Wazir rejoined, "There is no help for it; I
must crucify a man who sells conserve of pomegranate-grains lacking
pepper." All this time the carpenter was shaping the wood and Badr
al-Din looked on; and thus they did till night, when his uncle took him
and clapped him into the chest, saying, "The thing shall be done
to-morrow!" Then he waited until he knew Badr al-Din "Hasan to be
asleep, when he mounted; and taking the chest up before him, entered
the city and rode on to his own house, where he alighted and said to
his daughter, Sitt al-Husn, "Praised be Allah who hath reunited thee
with thy husband, the son of thine uncle! Up now, and order the house
as it was on thy bridal night." So the servants arose and lit the
candles; and the Wazir took out his plan of the nuptial chamber, and
directed them what to do till they had set everything in its stead, so
that whoever saw it would have no doubt but it was the very night of
the marriage. Then he bade them put down Badr al-Din Hasan's turband on
the settle, as he had deposited it with his own hand, and in like
manner his bag-trousers and the purse which were under the mattress:
and told daughter to undress herself and go to bed in the private
chamber as on her wedding-night, adding, "When the son of thine uncle
comes in to thee, say to him:—Thou hast loitered while going to the
privy; and call him to lie by thy side and keep him in converse till
daybreak, when we will explain the whole matter to him." Then he bade
take Badr al-Din Hasan out of the chest, after loosing the fetters from
his feet and stripping off all that was on him save the fine shirt of
blue silk in which he had slept on his wedding-night; so that he was
well-nigh naked and trouserless. All this was done whilst he was
sleeping on utterly unconscious. Then, by doom of Destiny, Badr al-Din
Hasan turned over and awoke; and, finding himself in a lighted
vestibule, said to himself, "Surely I am in the mazes of some dream."
So he rose and went on a little to an inner door and looked in and lo!
he was in the very chamber wherein the bride had been displayed to him;
and there he saw the bridal alcove and the settle and his turband and
all his clothes. When he saw this he was confounded and kept advancing
with one foot, and retiring with the other, saying, "Am I sleeping or
waking?" And he began rubbing his forehead and saying (for indeed he
was thoroughly astounded), "By Allah, verily this is the chamber of the
bride who was displayed before me! Where am I then? I was surely but
now in a box!" Whilst he was talking with himself, Sitt al-Husn
suddenly lifted the corner of the chamber-curtain and said, "O my lord,
wilt thou not come in? Indeed thou hast loitered long in the
water-closet." When he heard her words and saw her face he burst out
laughing and said, "Of a truth this is a very nightmare among dreams!"
Then he went in sighing, and pondered what had come to pass with him
and was perplexed about his case, and his affair became yet more
obscure to him when he saw his turband and bag-trousers and when,
feeling the pocket, he found the purse containing the thousand gold
pieces. So he stood still and muttered, "Allah is all knowing!
Assuredly I am dreaming a wild waking dream!" Then said the Lady of
Beauty to him, "What ails thee to look puzzled and perplexed?"; adding,
"Thou wast a very different man during the first of the night!" He
laughed and asked her, "How long have I been away from thee?"; and she
answered him, "Allah preserve thee and His Holy Name be about thee!
Thou didst but go out an hour ago for an occasion and return. Are thy
wits clean gone?" When Badr al-Din Hasan heard this, he laughed,
[FN#480] and said, "Thou hast spoken truth; but, when I went out from
thee, I forgot myself awhile in the draught-house and dreamed that I
was a cook at Damascus and abode there ten years; and there came to me
a boy who was of the sons of the great, and with him an Eunuch." Here
he passed his hand over his forehead and, feeling the scar, cried, "By
Allah, O my lady, it must have been true, for he struck my forehead
with a stone and cut it open from eye-brow to eye-brow; and here is the
mark: so it must have been on wake." Then he added, "But perhaps I
dreamt it when we fell asleep, I and thou, in each other's arms, for
meseems it was as though I travelled to Damascus without tarbush and
trousers and set up as a cook there." Then he was perplexed and
considered for awhile, and said, "By Allah, I also fancied that I
dressed a conserve of pomegranate-grains and put too little pepper in
it. By Allah, I must have slept in the numerocent and have seen the
whole of this in a dream; but how long was that dream!" "Allah upon
thee," said Sitt al-Husn, "and what more sawest thou?" So he related
all to her; and presently said, "By Allah had I not woke up they would
have nailed me to a cross of wood!" "Wherefore?" asked she; and he
answered, "For putting too little pepper in the conserve of
pomegranate-grains, and meseemed they demolished my shop and dashed to
pieces my pots and pans, destroyed all my stuff and put me in a box;
they then sent for the carpenter to fashion a cross for me and would
have crucified me thereon. Now Alham-dolillah! thanks be to Allah, for
that all this happened to me in sleep, and not on wake." Sitt al-Husn
laughed and clasped him to her bosom and he her to his: then he thought
again and said, "By Allah, it could not be save while I was awake:
truly I know not what to think of it." Then he lay him down and all the
night he was bewildered about his case, now saying, "I was dreaming!"
and then saying, "I was awake!", till morning, when his uncle Shams
al-Din, the Wazir, came to him and saluted him. When Badr al-Din Hasan
saw him he said, "By Allah, art thou not he who bade bind my hands
behind me and smash my shop and nail me to a cross on a matter of
conserved pomegranate-grains because the dish lacked a sufficiency of
pepper?" Whereupon the Wazir said to him, "Know, O my son, that truth
hath shown it soothfast and the concealed hath been revealed! [FN#481]
Thou art the son of my brother, and I did all this with thee to certify
myself that thou wast indeed he who went in unto my daughter that
night. I could not be sure of this, till I saw that thou knewest the
chamber and thy turband and thy trousers and thy gold and the papers in
thy writing and in that of thy father, my brother; for I had never seen
thee afore that and knew thee not; and as to thy mother I have
prevailed upon her to come with me from Bassorah." So saying, he threw
himself on his nephew's breast and wept for joy; and Badr al-Din Hasan,
hearing these words from his uncle, marvelled with exceeding marvel and
fell on his neck and also shed tears for excess of delight. Then said
the Wazir to him, "O my son, the sole cause of all this is what passed
between me and thy sire;" and he told him the manner of his father
wayfaring to Bassorah and all that had occurred to part them. Lastly
the Wazir sent for Ajib; and when his father saw him he cried, "And
this is he who struck me with the stone!" Quoth the Wazir, "This is thy
son!" And Badr al-Din Hasan threw himself upon his boy and began
repeating:—

"Long have I wept o'er severance ban and bane, * Long from mine eyelids
tear-rills rail and rain:
And vowed I if Time re-union bring * My tongue from name of "Severance"
I'll restrain:
Joy hath o'ercome me to this stress that I * From joy's revulsion to
shed tears am fain:
Ye are so trained to tears, O eyne of me! * You weep with pleasure as
you weep with pain." [FN#482]


When he had ended his verse his mother came in and threw herself upon
him and began reciting:—

"When we met we complained, * Our hearts were sore wrung:
But plaint is not pleasant * Fro' messenger's tongue."


Then she wept and related to him what had befallen her since his
departure, and he told her what he had suffered, and they thanked Allah
Almighty for their reunion. Two days after his arrival the Wazir Shams
al-din went in to the Sultan and, kissing the ground between his hands,
greeted him with the greeting due to Kings. The Sultan rejoiced at his
return and his face brightened and, placing him hard by his side,
[FN#483] asked him to relate all he had seen in his wayfaring and
whatso had betided him in his going and coming. So the Wazir told him
all that had passed from first to last and the Sultan said, "Thanks be
to Allah for thy victory [FN#484] and the winning of thy wish and thy
safe return to thy children and thy people! And now I needs must see
the son of thy brother, Hasan of Bassorah, so bring him to the
audience-hall to-morrow." Shams al-Din replied, "Thy slave shall stand
in thy presence to-morrow, Inshallah, if it be God's will." Then he
saluted him and, returning to his own house, informed his nephew of the
Sultan's desire to see him, whereto replied Hasan, whilome the
Bassorite, "The slave is obedient to the orders of his lord." And the
result was that next day he accompanied his uncle, Shams al-Din, to the
Divan; and, after saluting the Sultan and doing him reverence in most
ceremonious obeisance and with most courtly obsequiousness, he began
improvising these verses:—

"The first in rank to kiss the ground shall deign * Before you,
     and all ends and aims attain:
You are Honour's fount; and all that hope of you, * Shall gain
     more honour than Hope hoped to gain."


The Sultan smiled and signed to him to sit down. So he took a seat
close to his uncle, Shams al-Din, and the King asked him his name.
Quoth Badr al-Din Hasan, "The meanest of thy slaves is known as Hasan
the Bassorite, who is instant in prayer for thee day and night." The
Sultan was pleased at his words and, being minded to test his learning
and prove his good breeding, asked him, "Dost thou remember any verses
in praise of the mole on the cheek?" He answered, "I do," and began
reciting:—

"When I think of my love and our parting-smart, * My groans go forth
and my tears upstart:
He's a mole that reminds me in colour and charms * O' the black o' the
eye and the grain [FN#485] of the heart."


The King admired and praised the two couplets and said to him, "Quote
something else; Allah bless thy sire and may thy tongue never tire!" So
he began:—

"That cheek-mole's spot they evened with a grain * Of musk, nor did
they here the simile strain:
Nay, marvel at the face comprising all * Beauty, nor falling short by
single grain."


The King shook with pleasure [FN#486] and said to him, "Say more:
Allah bless thy days!" So he began:—

"O you whose mole on cheek enthroned recalls * A dot of musk upon a
stone of ruby,
Grant me your favours! Be not stone at heart! * Core of my heart whose
only sustenance you be!"


Quoth the King, "Fair comparison, O Hasan! [FN#487] thou hast spoken
excellently well and hast proved thyself accomplished in every
accomplishment! Now explain to me how many meanings be there in the
Arabic language [FN#488] for the word Khal or mole." He replied, "Allah
keep the King! Seven and fifty and some by tradition say fifty." Said
the Sultan, "Thou sayest sooth," presently adding, "Hast thou knowledge
as to the points of excellence in beauty?" "Yes," answered Badr al-Din
Hasan, "Beauty consisteth in brightness of face, clearness of
complexion, shapeliness of nose, gentleness of eyes, sweetness of
mouth, cleverness of speech, slenderness of shape and seemliness of all
attributes. But the acme of beauty is in the hair and, indeed,
al-Shihab the Hijazi hath brought together all these items in his
doggrel verse of the metre Rajaz, [FN#489] and it is this:

Say thou to skin "Be soft," to face "Be fair," * And gaze, nor shall
they blame howso thou stare:
Fine nose in Beauty's list is high esteemed; * Nor less an eye full,
bright and debonnair:
Eke did they well to laud the lovely lips * (Which e'en the sleep of me
will never spare);
A winning tongue, a stature tall and straight; [FN#490] * A seemly
union of gifts rarest rare:
But Beauty's acme in the hair one views it; * So hear my strain and
with some few excuse it!"


The Sultan was captivated by his converse and, regarding him as a
friend, asked, "What meaning is there in the saw 'Shurayh is foxier
than the fox'?" And he answered, "Know, O King (whom Almighty Allah
keep!) that the legist Shurayh [FN#491] was wont, during the days of
the plague, to make a visitation to Al-Najaf; and, whenever he stood up
to pray, there came a fox which would plant himself facing him and
which, by mimicking his movements, distracted him from his devotions.
Now when this became longsome to him, one day he doffed his shirt and
set it upon a cane and shook out the sleeves; then placing his turband
on the top and girding its middle with a shawl, he stuck it up in the
place where he used to pray. Presently up trotted the fox according to
his custom and stood over against the figure, whereupon Shurayh came
behind him, and took him. Hence the sayer saith, 'Shurayh foxier than
the fox.'" When the Sultan heard Badr al-Din Hasan's explanation he
said to his uncle, Shams al-Din, "Truly this the son of thy brother is
perfect in courtly breeding and I do not think that his like can be
found in Cairo." At this Hasan arose and kissed the ground before him
and sat down again as a Mameluke should sit before his master. When the
Sultan had thus assured himself of his courtly breeding and bearing and
his knowledge of the liberal arts and belles-lettres, he joyed with
exceeding joy and invested him with a splendid robe of honour and
promoted him to an office whereby he might better his condition.
[FN#492] Then Badr al-Din Hasan arose and, kissing the ground before
the King, wished him continuance of glory and asked leave to retire
with his uncle, the Wazir Shams al-Din. The Sultan gave him leave and
he issued forth and the two returned home, where food was set before
them and they ate what Allah had given them. After finishing his meal
Hasan repaired to the sitting-chamber of his wife, the Lady of Beauty,
and told her what had past between him and the Sultan; whereupon quoth
she, "He cannot fail to make thee a cup-companion and give thee largess
in excess and load thee with favours and bounties; so shalt thou, by
Allah's blessing, dispread, like the greater light, the rays of thy
perfection wherever thou be, on shore or on sea." Said he to her, "I
purpose to recite a Kasidah, an ode, in his praise, that he may
redouble in affection for me." "Thou art right in thine intent," she
answered, "so gather thy wits together and weigh thy words, and I shall
surely see my husband favoured with his highest favour." Thereupon
Hasan shut himself up and composed these couplets on a solid base and
abounding in inner grace and copies them out in a hand-writing of the
nicest taste. They are as follows:—

Mine is a Chief who reached most haught estate, * Treading the pathways
of the good and great:
His justice makes all regions safe and sure, * And against froward foes
bars every gate:
Bold lion, hero, saint, e'en if you call * Seraph or Sovran [FN#493] he
with all may rate!
The poorest suppliant rich from him returns, * All words to praise him
were inadequate.
He to the day of peace is saffron Morn, * And murky Night in furious
warfare's bate.
Bow 'neath his gifts our necks, and by his deeds * As King of freeborn
[FN#494] souls he 'joys his state:
Allah increase for us his term of years, * And from his lot avert all
risks and fears!


When he had finished transcribing the lines, he despatched them, in
charge of one of his uncle's slaves, to the Sultan, who perused them
and his fancy was pleased; so he read them to those present and all
praised them with the highest praise. Thereupon he sent for the writer
to his sitting-chamber and said to him, "Thou art from this day forth
my boon-companion and I appoint to thee a monthly solde of a thousand
dirhams, over and above that I bestowed on thee aforetime." So Hasan
rose and, kissing the ground before the King several times, prayed for
the continuance of his greatness and glory and length of life and
strength. Thus Badr al-Din Hasan the Bassorite waxed high in honour and
his fame flew forth to many regions and he abode in all comfort and
solace and delight of life with his uncle and his own folk till Death
overtook him. When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid heard this story from the
mouth of his Wazir, Ja'afar the Barmecide, he marvelled much and said,
"It behoves that these stories be written in letters of liquid gold."
Then he set the slave at liberty and assigned to the youth who had
slain his wife such a monthly stipend as sufficed to make his life
easy; he also gave him a concubine from amongst his own slave-girls and
the young man became one of his cup-companions. "Yet this story,"
(continued Shahrazad) "is in no wise stranger than the tale of the
Tailor and the Hunchback and the Jew and the Reeve and the Nazarene,
and what betided them." Quoth the King, "And what may that be?" So
Shahrazad began, in these words,[FN#495]


THE HUNCHBACK’S TALE.


It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there dwelt during times of
yore, and years and ages long gone before, in a certain city of
China,[FN#496] a Tailor who was an open handed man that loved
pleasuring and merry making; and who was wont, he and his wife, to
solace themselves from time to time with public diversions and
amusements. One day they went out with the first of the light and were
returning in the evening when they fell in with a Hunchback, whose
semblance would draw a laugh from care and dispel the horrors of
despair. So they went up to enjoy looking at him and invited him to go
home with them and converse and carouse with them that night. He
consented and accompanied them afoot to their home; whereupon the
Tailor fared forth to the bazar (night having just set in) and bought a
fried fish and bread and lemons and dry sweetmeats for dessert; and set
the victuals before the Hunchback and they ate. Presently the Tailor's
wife took a great fid of fish and gave it in a gobbet to the Gobbo,
stopping his mouth with her hand and saying, "By Allah, thou must down
with it at a single gulp; and I will not give thee time to chew it." So
he bolted it; but therein was a stiff bone which stuck in his gullet
and, his hour being come, he died.—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-fifth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Tailor's
wife gave the Hunchback that mouthful of fish which ended his term of
days he died on the instant. Seeing this the Tailor cried aloud, "There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Alas, that this poor
wretch should have died in so foolish fashion at our hands!" and the
woman rejoined, "Why this idle talk? Hast thou not heard his saying who
said:—

Why then waste I my time in grief, until I * find no friend to bear my
weight of woe
How sleep upon a fire that flames unquenched? * Upon the flames to rest
were hard enow!"


Asked her husband, "And what shall I do with him?"; and she answered,
"Rise and take him in thine arms and spread a silken kerchief over him;
then I will fare forth, with thee following me this very night and if
thou meet any one say, 'This is my son, and his mother and I are
carrying him to the doctor that he may look at him.'" So he rose and
taking the Hunchback in his arms bore him along the streets, preceded
by his wife who kept crying, "O my son, Allah keep thee! what part
paineth thee and where hath this small-pox[FN#497] attacked thee?" So
all who saw them said "'Tis a child sick of small-pox." [FN#498] They
went along asking for the physician's house till folk directed them to
that of a leach which was a Jew. They knocked at the door, and there
came down to them a black slave girl who opened and, seeing a man
bearing a babe, and a woman with him, said to them, "What is the
matter?" "We have a little one with us," answered the Tailor's wife,
"and we wish to show him to the physician: so take this quarter dinar
and give it to thy master and let him come down and see my son who is
sore sick." The girl went up to tell her master, whereupon the Tailor's
wife walked into the vestibule and said to her husband, "Leave the
Hunchback here and let us fly for our lives." So the Tailor carried the
dead man to the top of the stairs and propped him upright against the
wall and ran away, he and his wife. Meanwhile the girl went in to the
Jew and said to him, "At the door are a man and a woman with a sick
child and they have given me a quarter dinar for thee, that thou mayest
go down and look at the little one and prescribe for it." As soon as
the Jew saw the quarter dinar he rejoiced and rose quickly in his greed
of gain and went forth hurriedly in the dark; but hardly had he made a
step when he stumbled on the corpse and threw it over, when it rolled
to the bottom of the staircase. So he cried out to the girl to hurry up
with the light, and she brought it, whereupon he went down and
examining the Hunchback found that he was stone dead. So he cried out,
"O for Esdras![FN#499] O for Moses! O for Aaron! O for Joshua, son of
Nun! O the Ten Commandments! I have stumbled against the sick one and
he hath fallen downstairs and he is dead! How shall I get this man I
have killed out of my house? O by the hoofs of the ass of Esdras!" Then
he took up the body and, carrying it into the house, told his wife what
had happened and she said to him, "Why dost thou sit still? If thou
keep him here till day break we shall both lose our lives. Let us two
carry him to the terrace roof and throw him over into the house of our
neighbour, the Moslem, for if he abide there a night the dogs will come
down on him from the adjoining terraces and eat him up." Now his
neighbour was a Reeve, the controller of the Sultan's kitchen, and was
wont to bring back great store of oil and fat and broken meats; but the
cats and rats used to eat it, or, if the dogs scented a fat sheep's
tail they would come down from the nearest roofs and tear at it; and on
this wise the beasts had already damaged much of what he brought home.
So the Jew and his wife carried the Hunchback up to the roof; and,
letting him down by his hands and feet through the wind-shaft[FN#500]
into the Reeve's house, propped him up against the wall and went their
ways. Hardly had they done this when the Reeve, who had been passing an
evening with his friends hearing a recitation of the Koran, came home
and opened the door and, going up with a lighted candle, found a son of
Adam standing in the corner under the ventilator. When he saw this, he
said, "Wah! by Allah, very good forsooth! He who robbeth my stuff is
none other than a man." Then he turned to the Hunchback and said, "So
'tis thou that stealest the meat and the fat! I thought it was the cats
and dogs, and I kill the dogs and cats of the quarter and sin against
them by killing them. And all the while 'tis thou comest down from the
house terrace through the wind shaft. But I will avenge myself upon
thee with my own hand!" So he snatched up a heavy hammer and set upon
him and smote him full on the breast and he fell down. Then he examined
him and, finding that he was dead, cried out in horror, thinking that
he had killed him, and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" And he feared for his life,
and added "Allah curse the oil and the meat and the grease and the
sheep's tails to boot! How hath fate given this man his quietus at my
hand!" Then he looked at the body and seeing it was that of a Gobbo,
said, "Was it not enough for thee to be a hunchback,[FN#501] but thou
must likewise be a thief and prig flesh and fat! O thou Veiler,[FN#502]
deign to veil me with Thy curtain of concealment!" So he took him up on
his shoulders and, going forth with him from his house about the latter
end of the night, carried him to the nearest end of the bazar, where he
set him up on his feet against the wall of a shop at the head of a dark
lane, and left him and went away. After a while up came a
Nazarene,[FN#503] the Sultan's broker who, much bemused with liquor,
was purposing for the Hammam bath as his drunkenness whispered in his
ear, "Verily the call to matins[FN#504] is nigh." He came plodding
along and staggering about till he drew near the Hunchback and squatted
down to make water[FN#505] over against him; when he happened to glance
around and saw a man standing against the wall. Now some person had
snatched off the Christian's turband[FN#506] in the first of the night;
so when he saw the Hunchback hard by he fancied that he also meant to
steal his headdress. Thereupon he clenched his fist and struck him on
the neck, felling him to the ground, and called aloud to the watchman
of the bazar, and came down on the body in his drunken fury and kept on
belabouring and throttling the corpse. Presently the Charley came up
and, finding a Nazarene kneeling on a Moslem and frapping him, asked,
"What harm hath this one done?"; and the Broker answered, "The fellow
meant to snatch off my turband." "Get up from him," quoth the watch
man. So he arose and the Charley went up to the Hunchback and finding
him dead, exclaimed, "By Allah, good indeed! A Christian killing a
Mahometan!" Then he seized the Broker and, tying his hands behind his
back, carried him to the Governor's house,[FN#507] and all the while
the Nazarene kept saying to himself, "O Messiah! O Virgin! how came I
to kill this fellow? And in what a hurry he must have been to depart
this life when he died of a single blow!" Presently, as his drunkenness
fled, came dolour in its stead. So the Broker and the body were kept in
the Governor's place till morning morrowed, when the Wali came out and
gave order to hang the supposed murderer and commanded the
executioner[FN#508] make proclamation of the sentence. Forthwith they
set up a gallows under which they made the Nazarene stand and the torch
bearer, who was hangman, threw the rope round his neck and passed one
end through the pulley, and was about to hoist him up[FN#509] when lo!
the Reeve, who was passing by, saw the Broker about to be hanged; and,
making his way through the people, cried out to the executioner, "Hold!
Hold! I am he who killed the Hunchback!" Asked the Governor, "What made
thee kill him?"; and he answered, "I went home last night and there
found this man who had come down the ventilator to steal my property;
so I smote him with a hammer on the breast and he died forthright. Then
I took him up and carried him to the bazar and set him up against the
wall in such a place near such a lane;" adding, "Is it not enough for
me to have killed a Moslem without also killing a Christian? So hang
none other but me." When the Governor heard these words he released the
Broker and said to the torch bearer, "Hang up this man on his own
confession." So he loosed the cord from the Nazarene's neck and threw
it round that of the Reeve and, making him stand under the gallows
tree, was about to string him up when behold, the Jewish physician
pushed through the people and shouted to the executioner, "Hold! Hold!
It was I and none else killed the Hunchback! Last night I was sitting
at home when a man and a woman knocked at the door carrying this Gobbo
who was sick, and gave my handmaid a quarter dinar, bidding her hand me
the fee and tell me to come down and see him. Whilst she was gone the
man and the woman brought him into the house and, setting him on the
stairs, went away; and presently I came down and not seeing him, for I
was in the dark, stumbled over him and he fell to the foot of the
staircase and died on the moment. Then we took him up, I and my wife,
and carried him on to the top terrace; and, the house of this Reeve
being next door to mine, we let the body down through the ventilator.
When he came home and found the Hunchback in his house, he fancied he
was a thief and struck him with a hammer, so that he fell to the
ground, and our neighbour made certain that he had slain him. Now is it
not enough for me to have killed one Moslem unwittingly, without
burdening myself with taking the life of another Moslem wittingly?"
When the Governor heard this he said to the hangman, "Set free the
Reeve and hang the Jew." Thereupon the torch bearer took him and slung
the cord round his neck when behold, the Tailor pushed through the
people, and shouted to the executioner, "Hold! Hold! It was I and none
else killed the Hunchback; and this was the fashion thereof. I had been
out a pleasuring yesterday and, coming back to supper, fell in with
this Gobbo, who was drunk and drumming away and singing lustily to his
tambourine. So I accosted him and carried him to my house and bought a
fish, and we sat down to eat. Presently my wife took a fid of fish and,
making a gobbet of it,[FN#510] crammed it into his mouth; but some of
it went down the wrong way or stuck in his gullet and he died on the
instant. So we lifted him up, I and my wife, and carried him to the
Jew's house where the slave girl came down and opened the door to us
and I said to her, 'Tell thy master that there are a man and a woman
and a sick person for thee to see!' I gave her a quarter dinar and she
went up to tell her master; and, whilst she was gone, I carried the
Hunchback to the head of the staircase and propped him up against the
wall, and went off with my wife. When the Jew came down he stumbled
over him and thought that he had killed him." Then he asked the Jew,
"Is this the truth?"; and the Jew answered, "Yes." Thereupon the Tailor
turned to the Governor, and said, "Leave go the Jew and hang me." When
the Governor heard the Tailor's tale he marvelled at the matter of this
Hunchback and exclaimed. "Verily this is an adventure which should be
recorded in books!" Then he said to the hangman, "Let the Jew go and
hang the Tailor on his own confession." The executioner took the Tailor
and put the rope around his neck and said, "I am tired of such slow
work: we bring out this one and change him for that other, and no one
is hanged after all!" Now the Hunchback in question was, they relate,
jester to the Sultan of China who could not bear him out of his sight;
so when the fellow got drunk and did not make his appearance that night
or the next day till noon, the Sultan asked some of his courtiers about
him and they answered, "O our lord, the Governor hath come upon him
dead and hath ordered his murderer to be hanged; but, as the hangman
was about to hoist him up there came a second and a third and a fourth
and each one said, 'It is I, and none else killed the Hunchback!' and
each gave a full and circumstantial account of the manner of the jester
being killed." When the King heard this he cried aloud to the
Chamberlain in waiting, "Go down to the Governor and bring me all four
of them." So the Chamberlain went down at once to the place of
execution, where he found the torch bearer on the point of hanging the
Tailor and shouted to him, "Hold! Hold!" Then he gave the King's
command to the Governor who took the Tailor, the Jew, the Nazarene and
the Reeve (the Hunchback's body being borne on men's shoulders) and
went up with one and all of them to the King. When he came into the
presence, he kissed the ground and acquainted the ruler with the whole
story which it is needless to relate for, as they say, There is no
avail in a thrice told tale. The Sultan hearing it marvelled and was
moved to mirth and commanded the story to be written in letters of
liquid gold, saying to those present, "Did ye ever hear a more wondrous
tale than that of my Hunchback?" Thereupon the Nazarene broker came
forward and said, "O King of the age, with thy leave I will tell thee a
thing which happened to myself and which is still more wondrous and
marvellous and pleasurable and delectable than the tale of the
Hunchback." Quoth the King "Tell us what thou hast to say!" So he began
in these words


The Nazarene Broker’s Story.


O King of the age, I came to this thy country with merchandise and
Destiny stayed me here with you: but my place of birth was Cairo, in
Egypt, where I also was brought up, for I am one of the Copts and my
father was a broker before me. When I came to man's estate he departed
this life and I succeeded to his business. One day, as I was sitting in
my shop, behold, there came up to me a youth as handsome as could be,
wearing sumptuous raiment and riding a fine ass.[FN#511] When he saw me
he saluted me, and I stood up to do him honour: then he took out a
kerchief containing a sample of sesame and asked, "How much is this
worth per Ardabb?";[FN#512] whereto I answered, "An hundred dirhams."
Quoth he, "Take porters and gaugers and metesmen and come tomorrow to
the Khan al-Jawáli,[FN#513] by the Gate of Victory quarter where thou
wilt find me." Then he fared forth leaving with me the sample of sesame
in his kerchief; and I went the round of my customers and ascertained
that every Ardabb would fetch an hundred and twenty dirhams. Next day I
took four metesmen and walked with them to the Khan, where I found him
awaiting me. As soon as he saw me he rose and opened his magazine, when
we measured the grain till the store was empty; and we found the
contents fifty Ardabbs, making five thousand pieces of silver. Then
said he, "Let ten dirhams on every Ardabb be thy brokerage; so take the
price and keep in deposit four thousand and five hundred dirhams for
me; and, when I have made an end of selling the other wares in my
warehouses, I will come to thee and receive the amount." "I will well,"
replied I and kissing his hand went away, having made that day a profit
of a thousand dirhams. He was absent a month, at the end of which he
came to me and asked, "Where be the dirhams?" I rose and saluted him
and answered to him, "Wilt thou not eat somewhat in my house?" But he
refused with the remark, "Get the monies ready and I will presently
return and take them." Then he rode away. So I brought out the dirhams
and sat down to await him, but he stayed away for another month, when
he came back and said to me, "Where be the dirhams?" I rose and
saluting him asked, "Wilt thou not eat some thing in my house?" But he
again refused adding, "Get me the monies ready and I will presently
return and take them." Then he rode off. So I brought out the dirhams
and sat down to await his return; but he stayed away from me a third
month, and I said, "Verily this young man is liberality in incarnate
form." At the end of the month he came up, riding a mare mule and
wearing a suit of sumptuous raiment; he was as the moon on the night of
fullness, and he seemed as if fresh from the baths, with his cheeks
rosy bright, and his brow flower white, and a mole spot like a grain of
ambergris delighting the sight; even as was said of such an one by the
poet:—

Full moon with sun in single mansion * In brightest sheen and fortune
rose and shone,
With happy splendour changing every sprite: * Hail to what guerdons
prayer with blissfull boon!
Their charms and grace have gained perfection's height, * All hearts
have conquered and all wits have won.
Laud to the Lord for works so wonder strange, * And what th' Almighty
wills His hand hath done!


When I saw him I rose to him and invoking blessings on him asked, O my
lord, wilt thou not take thy monies?" "Whence the hurry?"[FN#514] quoth
he, "Wait till I have made an end of my business and then I will come
and take them." Again he rode away and I said to myself, "By Allah,
when he comes next time needs must I make him my guest; for I have
traded with his dirhams and have gotten large gains thereby." At the
end of the year he came again, habited in a suit of clothes more
sumptuous than the former; and, when I conjured him by the Evangel to
alight at my house and eat of my guest food, he said, "I consent, on
condition that what thou expendest on me shall be of my monies still in
thy hands. I answered, "So be it," and made him sit down whilst I got
ready what was needful of meat and drink and else besides; and set the
tray before him, with the invitation "Bismillah"![FN#515] Then he drew
near the tray and put out his left hand[FN#516] and ate with me; and I
marvelled at his not using the right hand. When we had done eating, I
poured water on his hand and gave him wherewith to wipe it. Upon this
we sat down to converse after I had set before him some sweetmeats; and
I said to him, "O my master, prithee relieve me by telling me why thou
eatest with thy left hand? Perchance something aileth thy other hand?"
When he heard my words, he repeated these verses:—

"Dear friend, ask not what burneth in my breast, * Lest thou see fiery
pangs eye never saw:
Wills not my heart to harbour Salma in stead * Of Layla's[FN#517] love,
but need hath ne'er a law!"


And he put out his right arm from his sleeve and behold, the hand was
cut off, a wrist without a fist. I was astounded at this but he said,
"Marvel not, and think not that I ate with my left hand for conceit and
insolence, but from necessity; and the cutting off my right hand was
caused by an adventure of the strangest." Asked I, "And what caused
it?"; and he answered:—"Know that I am of the sons of Baghdad and my
father was of notables of that city. When I came to man's estate I
heard the pilgrims and wayfarers, travellers and merchants talk of the
land of Egypt and their words sank deep into my mind till my parent
died, when I took a large sum of money and furnished myself for trade
with stuffs of Baghdad and Mosul and, packing them up in bales, set out
on my wanderings; and Allah decreed me safety till I entered this your
city. Then he wept and began repeating:—

The blear eyed 'scapes the pits * Wherein the lynx eyed fall:
A word the wise man slays * And saves the natural:
The Moslem fails of food * The Kafir feasts in hall:
What art or act is man's? * God's will obligeth all!


Now when he had ended his verse he said, So I entered Cairo and took
off my loads and stored my stuffs in the Khan "Al-Masrúr."[FN#518] Then
I gave the servant a few silvers wherewith to buy me some food and lay
down to sleep awhile. When I awoke I went to the street called "Bayn
al-Kasrayn"—Between the two Palaces—and presently returned and rested
my night in the Khan. When it was morning I opened a bale and took out
some stuff saying to myself, "I will be off and go through some of the
bazars and see the state of the market." So I loaded the stuff on some
of my slaves and fared forth till I reached the Kaysariyah or Exchange
of Jaharkas;[FN#519] where the brokers who knew of my coming came to
meet me. They took the stuffs and cried them for sale, but could not
get the prime cost of them. I was vexed at this, however the Shaykh of
the brokers said to me, "O my lord, I will tell thee how thou mayest
make a profit of thy goods. Thou shouldest do as the merchants do and
sell thy merchandise at credit for a fixed period, on a contract drawn
up by a notary and duly witnessed; and employ a Shroff to take thy dues
every Monday and Thursday. So shalt thou gain two dirhams and more, for
every one; and thou shalt solace and divert thyself by seeing Cairo and
the Nile." Quoth I, "This is sound advice," and carried the brokers to
the Khan. They took my stuffs and went with them on 'Change where I
sold them well taking bonds for the value. These bonds I deposited with
a Shroff, a banker, who gave me a receipt with which I returned to the
Khan. Here I stayed a whole month, every morning breaking my fast with
a cup of wine and making my meals on pigeon's meat, mutton and
sweetmeats, till the time came when my receipts began to fall due. So,
every Monday and Thursday I used to go on 'Change and sit in the shop
of one or other of the merchants, whilst the notary and money changer
went round to recover the monies from the traders, till after the time
of mid afternoon prayer, when they brought me the amount, and I counted
it and, sealing the bags, returned with them to the Khan. On a certain
day which happened to be a Monday,[FN#520] I went to the Hammam and
thence back to my Khan, and sitting in my own room[FN#521] broke my
fast with a cup of wine, after which I slept a little. When I awoke I
ate a chicken and, perfuming my person, repaired to the shop of a
merchant hight Badr al-Din al-Bostáni, or the Gardener,[FN#522] who
welcomed me; and we sat talking awhile till the bazar should open.
Presently, behold, up came a lady of stately figure wearing a
head-dress of the most magnificent, perfumed with the sweetest of
scents and walking with graceful swaying gait; and seeing me she raised
her mantilla allowing me a glimpse of her beautiful black eyes. She
saluted Badr al-Din who returned her salutation and stood up, and
talked with her; and the moment I heard her speak, the love of her got
hold of my heart. Presently she said to Badr al-Din, "Hast thou by thee
a cut piece of stuff woven with thread of pure gold?" So he brought out
to her a piece from those he had bought of me and sold it to her for
one thousand two hundred dirhams; when she said, "I will take the piece
home with me and send thee its price." "That is impossible, O my lady,"
the merchant replied, "for here is the owner of the stuff and I owe him
a share of profit." "Fie upon thee!" she cried, "Do I not use to take
from thee entire rolls of costly stuff, and give thee a greater profit
than thou expectest, and send thee the money?" "Yes," rejoined he; "but
I stand in pressing need of the price this very day." Hereupon she took
up the piece and threw it back upon his lap, saying "Out on thee! Allah
confound the tribe of you which estimates none at the right value;" and
she turned to go. I felt my very soul going with her; so I stood up and
stayed her, saying, "I conjure thee by the Lord, O my lady, favour me
by retracing thy gracious steps." She turned back with a smile and
said, "For thy sake I return," and took a seat opposite me in the shop.
Then quoth I to Badr al-Din, "What is the price they asked thee for
this piece?"; and quoth he, "Eleven hundred dirhams." I rejoined, "The
odd hundred shall be thy profit: bring me a sheet of paper and I will
write thee a discharge for it." Then I wrote him a receipt in my own
handwriting and gave the piece to the lady, saying, "Take it away with
thee and, if thou wilt, bring me its price next bazar day; or better
still, accept it as my guest gift to thee." "Allah requite thee with
good," answered she, "and make thee my husband and lord and master of
all I have!"[FN#523] And Allah favoured her prayer. I saw the Gates of
Paradise swing open before me and said, "O my lady, let this piece of
stuff be now thine and another like it is ready for thee, only let me
have one look at thy face." So she raised her veil and I saw a face the
sight of which bequeathed to me a thousand sighs, and my heart was so
captivated by her love that I was no longer ruler of my reason. Then
she let fall her face veil and taking up the piece of stuff said, "O my
lord make me not desolate by thine absence!" and turned away and
disappeared from my sight. I remained sitting on 'Change till past the
hour of after noon prayer, lost to the world by the love which had
mastered me, and the violence of my passion compelled me to make
enquiries concerning her of the merchant, who answered me, "This is a
lady and a rich: she is the daughter of a certain Emir who lately died
and left her a large fortune." Then I took leave of him and returned
home to the Khan where they set supper before me; but I could not eat
for thinking of her and when I lay down to sleep, sleep came not near
me. So I watched till morning, when I arose and donned a change of
raiment and drank a cup of wine and, after breaking my fast on some
slight matter, I went to the merchant's shop where I saluted him and
sat down by him. Presently up came the lady as usual, followed by a
slave girl and wearing a dress more sumptuous than before; and she
saluted me without noticing Badr al-Din and said in fluent graceful
speech (never heard I voice softer or sweeter), "Send one with me to
take the thousand and two hundred dirhams, the price of the piece."
"Why this hurry?" asked I and she answered, "May we never lose
thee!"[FN#524] and handed me the money. Then I sat talking with her and
presently I signed to her in dumb show, whereby she understood that I
longed to enjoy her person,[FN#525] and she rose up in haste with a
show of displeasure. My heart clung to her and I went forth from the
bazar and followed on her track. As I was walking suddenly a black
slave girl stopped me and said, "O my master, come speak with my
mistress."[FN#526] At this I was surprised and replied, "There is none
who knows me here;" but she rejoined, "O my lord, how soon hast thou
forgotten her! My lady is the same who was this day at the shop of such
a merchant." Then I went with her to the Shroff's, where I found the
lady who drew me to her side and said, "O my beloved, thine image is
firmly stamped upon my fancy, and love of thee hath gotten hold of my
heart: from the hour I first saw thee nor sleep nor food nor drink hath
given me aught of pleasure." I replied, "The double of that suffering
is mine and my state dispenseth me from complaint." Then said she, "O
my beloved, at thy house, or at mine?" "I am a stranger here and have
no place of reception save the Khan, so by thy favour it shall be at
thy house." "So be it; but this is Friday[FN#527] night and nothing can
be done till tomorrow after public prayers; go to the Mosque and pray;
then mount thine ass, and ask for the Habbániyah[FN#528] quarter; and,
when there, look out for the mansion of Al-Nakib[FN#529] Barakát,
popularly known as Abu Shámah the Syndic; for I live there: so do not
delay as I shall be expecting thee." I rejoiced with still greater joy
at this; and took leave of her and returned to my Khan, where I passed
a sleepless night. Hardly was I assured that morning had dawned when I
rose, changed my dress, perfumed myself with essences and sweet scents
and, taking fifty dinars in a kerchief, went from the Khan Masrúr to
the Zuwaylah[FN#530] gate, where I mounted an ass and said to its
owner, "Take me to the Habbaniyah." So he set off with me and brought
up in the twinkling of an eye at a street known as Darb al-Munkari,
where I said to him, "Go in and ask for the Syndic's mansion." He was
absent a while and then returned and said, "Alight." "Go thou before me
to the house," quoth I, adding, "Come back with the earliest light and
bring me home;" and he answered, "In Allah's name;" whereupon I gave
him a quarter dinar of gold, and he took it and went his ways. Then I
knocked at the door and out came two white slave girls, both young;
high-bosomed virgins, as they were moons, and said to me, "Enter, for
our mistress is expecting thee and she hath not slept the night long
for her delight in thee." I passed through the vestibule into a saloon
with seven doors, floored with parti-coloured marbles and furnished
with curtains and hangings of coloured silks: the ceiling was cloisonné
with gold and corniced with inscriptions[FN#531] emblazoned in lapis
lazuli; and the walls were stuccoed with Sultání gypsum[FN#532] which
mirrored the beholder's face. Around the saloon were latticed windows
overlooking a garden full of all manner of fruits; whose streams were
railing and rilling and whose birds were trilling and shrilling; and in
the heart of the hall was a jetting fountain at whose corners stood
birds fashioned in red gold crusted with pearls and gems and spouting
water crystal clear. When I entered and took a seat.—And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-sixth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued, When I entered and took a seat, the lady at once
came in crowned with a diadem[FN#533] of pearls and jewels; her face
dotted with artificial moles in indigo,[FN#534] her eyebrows pencilled
with Kohl and her hands and feet reddened with Henna. When she saw me
she smiled in my face and took me to her embrace and clasped me to her
breast; then she put her mouth to my mouth and sucked my tongue[FN#535]
(and I did likewise) and said, "Can it be true, O my little darkling,
thou art come to me?" adding, "Welcome and good cheer to thee! By
Allah, from the day I saw thee sleep hath not been sweet to me nor hath
food been pleasant." Quoth I, "Such hath also been my case: and I am
thy slave, thy negro slave." Then we sat down to converse and I hung my
head earthwards in bashfulness, but she delayed not long ere she set
before me a tray of the most exquisite viands, marinated meats,
fritters soaked in bee's[FN#536] honeys and chickens stuffed with sugar
and pistachio nuts, whereof we ate till we were satisfied. Then they
brought basin and ewer and I washed my hands and we scented ourselves
with rose water musk'd and sat down again to converse. So she began
repeating these couplets[FN#537]:

"Had we wist of thy coming, thy way had been strown
       With the blood of our heart and the balls of our sight:
Our cheek as a foot cloth to greet thee been thrown,
       That thy step on our eyelids should softly alight."


And she kept plaining of what had befallen her and I of what had
betided me; and love of her gat so firm hold of my heart that all my
wealth seemed a thing of naught in comparison with her. Then we fell to
toying and groping and kissing till night fall, when the handmaidens
set before us meats and a complete wine service, and we sat carousing
till the noon of night, when we lay down and I lay with her; never in
my life saw I a night like that night. When morning morrowed I arose
and took leave of her, throwing under the carpet bed the kerchief
wherein were the dinars[FN#538] and as I went out she wept and said, "O
my lord, when shall I look upon that lovely face again?" "I will be
with thee at sunset," answered I, and going out found the donkey boy,
who had brought me the day before, awaiting at the door. So I mounted
ass and rode to the Khan of Masrur where I alighted and gave the man a
half dinar, saying, "Return at sunset;" and he said "I will." Then I
breakfasted and went out to seek the price of my stuffs; after which I
returned, and taking a roast lamb and some sweetmeats, called a porter
and put the provision in his crate, and sent it to the lady paying the
man his hire.[FN#539] I went back to my business till sunset, when the
ass driver came to me and I took fifty dinars in a kerchief and rode to
her house where I found the marble floor swept, the brasses burnisht,
the branch lights burning, the wax candles ready lighted, the meat
served up and the wine strained.[FN#540] When my lady saw me she threw
her arms about my neck, and cried, "Thou hast desolated me by thine
absence." Then she set the tables before me and we ate till we were
satisfied, when the slave girls carried off the trays and served up
wine. We gave not over drinking till half the night was past; and,
being well warmed with drink, we went to the sleeping chamber and lay
there till morning. I then arose and fared forth from her leaving the
fifty dinars with her as before; and, finding the donkey boy at the
door, rode to the Khan and slept awhile. After that I went out to make
ready the evening meal and took a brace of geese with gravy on two
platters of dressed and peppered rice, and got ready
colocasia[FN#541]-roots fried and soaked in honey, and wax candles and
fruits and conserves and nuts and almonds and sweet scented flowers;
and I sent them all to her. As soon as it was night I again tied up
fifty dinars in a kerchief and, mounting the ass as usual, rode to the
mansion where we ate and drank and lay together till morning when I
threw the kerchief and dinars to her[FN#542] and rode back to the Khan.
I ceased not doing after that fashion till, after a sweet night, I woke
one fine morning and found myself beggared, dinar-less and dirhamless.
So said I to myself "All this be Satan's work;" and began to recite
these couplets:—

"Poverty dims the sheen of man whate'er his wealth has been, * E'en as
the sun about to set shines with a yellowing light
Absent he falls from memory, forgotten by his friends; * Present he
shareth not their joys for none in him delight
He walks the market shunned of all, too glad to hide his head, * In
desert places tears he sheds and moans his bitter plight
By Allah, 'mid his kith and kin a man, however good, * Waylaid by want
and penury is but a stranger wight!"


I fared forth from the Khan and walked down "Between the Palaces"
street till I came to the Zuwaylah Porte, where I found the people
crowding and the gateway blocked for the much folk. And by the decree
of Destiny I saw there a trooper against whom I pressed
unintentionally, so that my hand came upon his bosom pocket and I felt
a purse inside it. I looked and seeing a string of green silk hanging
from the pocket knew it for a purse; and the crush grew greater every
minute and just then, a camel laden with a load of fuel happened to
jostle the trooper on the opposite side, and he turned round to fend it
off from him, lest it tear his clothes; and Satan tempted me, so I
pulled the string and drew out a little bag of blue silk, containing
something which chinked like coin. But the soldier, feeling his pocket
suddenly lightened, put his hand to it and found it empty; whereupon he
turned to me and, snatching up his mace from his saddle bow, struck me
with it on the head. I fell to the ground, whilst the people came round
us and seizing the trooper's mare by the bridle said to him, "Strikest
thou this youth such a blow as this for a mere push!" But the trooper
cried out at them, "This fellow is an accursed thief!" Whereupon I came
to myself and stood up, and the people looked at me and said, "Nay, he
is a comely youth: he would not steal anything;" and some of them took
my part and others were against me and question and answer waxed loud
and warm. The people pulled at me and would have rescued me from his
clutches; but as fate decreed behold, the Governor, the Chief of
Police, and the watch[FN#543] entered the Zuwaylah Gate at this moment
and, seeing the people gathered together around me and the soldier, the
Governor asked, "What is the matter?" "By Allah! O Emir," answered the
trooper, "this is a thief! I had in my pocket a purse of blue silk
lined with twenty good gold pieces and he took it, whilst I was in the
crush." Quoth the Governor, "Was any one by thee at the time?"; and
quoth the soldier, "No." Thereupon the Governor cried out to the Chief
of Police who seized me, and on this wise the curtain of the Lord's.
protection was withdrawn from me. Then he said "Strip him;" and, when
they stripped me, they found the purse in my clothes. The Wali took it,
opened it and counted it; and, finding in it twenty dinars as the
soldier had said, waxed exceeding wroth and bade his guard bring me
before him. Then said he to me, "Now, O youth, speak truly: didst thou
steal this purse?"[FN#544] At this I hung my head to the ground and
said to myself, "If I deny having stolen it, I shall get myself into
terrible trouble." So I raised my head and said, "Yes, I took it." When
the Governor heard these words he wondered and summoned witnesses who
came forward and attested my confession. All this happened at the
Zuwaylah Gate. Then the Governor ordered the link bearer to cut off my
right hand, and he did so; after which he would have struck off my left
foot also; but the heart of the soldier softened and he took pity on me
and interceded for me with the Governor that I should not be
slain.[FN#545] Thereupon the Wali left me, and went away and the folk
remained round me and gave me a cup of wine to drink. As for the
trooper he pressed the purse upon me, and said, "Thou art a comely
youth and it befitteth not thou be a thief." So I repeated these
verses:—

"I swear by Allah's name, fair sir! no thief was I, * Nor, O thou best
of men! was I a bandit bred:
But Fortune's change and chance o'erthrew me suddenly, * And cark and
care and penury my course misled:
I shot it not, indeed, 'twas Allah shot the shaft * That rolled in dust
the Kingly diadem from my head."[FN#546]


The soldier turned away after giving me the purse; and I also went my
ways having wrapped my hand in a piece of rag and thrust it into my
bosom. My whole semblance had changed, and my colour had waxed yellow
from the shame and pain which had befallen me. Yet I went on to my
mistress's house where, in extreme perturbation of spirit I threw
myself down on the carpet bed. She saw me in this state and asked me,
"What aileth thee and why do I see thee so changed in looks?"; and I
answered, "My head paineth me and I am far from well." Whereupon she
was vexed and was concerned on my account and said, "Burn not my heart,
O my lord, but sit up and raise thy head and recount to me what hath
happened to thee today, for thy face tells me a tale." "Leave this
talk," replied I. But she wept and said, "Me seems thou art tired of
me, for I see thee contrary to thy wont." But I was silent; and she
kept on talking to me albeit I gave her no answer, till night came on.
Then she set food before me, but I refused it fearing lest she see me
eating with my left hand and said to her, "I have no stomach to eat at
present." Quoth she, "Tell me what hath befallen thee to day, and why
art thou so sorrowful and broken in spirit and heart?" Quoth I, "Wait
awhile; I will tell thee all at my leisure." Then she brought me wine,
saying, "Down with it, this will dispel thy grief: thou must indeed
drink and tell me of thy tidings." I asked her, "Perforce must I tell
thee?"; and she answered, "Yes." Then said I, "If it needs must be so,
then give me to drink with thine own hand." She filled and
drank,[FN#547] and filled again and gave me the cup which I took from
her with my left hand and wiped the tears from my eyelids and began
repeating:

"When Allah willeth aught befall a man * Who hath of ears and eyes and
wits full share:
His ears He deafens and his eyes He blinds * And draws his wits e'en as
we draw a hair[FN#548]
Till, having wrought His purpose, He restores * Man's wits, that warned
more circumspect he fare."


When I ended my verses I wept, and she cried out with an exceeding loud
cry, "What is the cause of thy tears? Thou burnest my heart! What makes
thee take the cup with thy left hand?" Quoth I, "Truly I have on my
right hand a boil;" and quoth she, "Put it out and I will open it for
thee."[FN#549] "It is not yet time to open it," I replied, "so worry me
not with thy words, for I will not take it out of the bandage at this
hour." Then I drank off the cup, and she gave not over plying me with
drink until drunkenness overcame me and I fell asleep in the place
where I was sitting; whereupon she looked at my right hand and saw a
wrist without a fist. So she searched me closely and found with me the
purse of gold and my severed hand wrapped up in the bit of rag.[FN#550]
With this such sorrow came upon her as never overcame any and she
ceased not lamenting on my account till the morning. When I awoke I
found that she had dressed me a dish of broth of four boiled chickens,
which she brought to me together with a cup of wine. I ate and drank
and laying down the purse, would have gone out; but she said to me,
"Whither away?"; and I answered, "Where my business calleth me;" and
said she, "Thou shalt not go: sit thee down." So I sat down and she
resumed, "Hath thy love for me so overpowered thee that thou hast
wasted all thy wealth and hast lost thine hand on my account? I take
thee to witness against me and also Allah be my witness that I will
never part with thee, but will die under thy feet; and soon thou shalt
see that my words are true." Then she sent for the Kazi and witnesses
and said to them, "Write my contract of marriage with this young man,
and bear ye witness that I have received the marriage
settlement."[FN#551] When they had drawn up the document she said, "Be
witness that all my monies which are in this chest and all I have in
slaves and handmaidens and other property is given in free gift to this
young man." So they took act of this statement enabling me to assume
possession in right of marriage; and then withdrew, after receiving
their fees. Thereupon she took me by the hand and, leading me to a
closet, opened a large chest and said to me, "See what is herein;" and
I looked and behold, it was full of kerchiefs. Quoth she, "This is the
money I had from thee and every kerchief thou gavest me, containing
fifty dinars, I wrapped up and cast into this chest; so now take thine
own, for it returns to thee, and this day thou art become of high
estate. Fortune and Fate afflicted thee so that thou didst lose thy
right hand for my sake; and I can never requite thee; nay, although I
gave my life 'twere but little and I should still remain thy debtor."
Then she added, "Take charge of thy property."; so I transferred the
contents of her chest to my chest, and added my wealth to her wealth
which I had given her, and my heart was eased and my sorrow ceased. I
stood up and kissed her and thanked her; and she said, "Thou hast given
thy hand for love of me and how am I able to give thee an equivalent?
By Allah, if I offered my life for thy love, it were indeed but little
and would not do justice to thy claim upon me." Then she made over to
me by deed all that she possessed in clothes and ornaments of gold and
pearls, and goods and farms and chattels, and lay not down to sleep
that night, being sorely grieved for my grief, till I told her the
whole of what had befallen me. I passed the night with her. But before
we had lived together a month's time she fell sorely sick and illness
increased upon her, by reason of her grief for the loss of my hand, and
she endured but fifty days before she was numbered among the folk of
futurity and heirs of immortality. So I laid her out and buried her
body in mother earth and let make a pious perlection of the
Koran[FN#552] for the health of her soul, and gave much money in alms
for her; after which I turned me from the grave and returned to the
house. There I found that she had left much substance in ready money
and slaves, mansions, lands and domains, and among her store houses was
a granary of sesame seed, whereof I sold part to thee; and I had
neither time nor inclination to take count with thee till I had sold
the rest of the stock in store; nor, indeed, even now have I made an
end of receiving the price. So I desire thou baulk me not in what I am
about to say to thee: twice have I eaten of thy food and I wish to give
thee as a present the monies for the sesame which are by thee. Such is
the cause of the cutting off my right hand and my eating with my left."
"Indeed," said I, "thou hast shown me the utmost kindness and
liberality." Then he asked me, "Why shouldst thou not travel with me to
my native country whither I am about to return with Cairene and
Alexandrian stuffs? Say me, wilt thou accompany me?"; and I answered "I
will." So I agreed to go with him at the head of the month, and I sold
all I had and bought other merchandise; then we set out and travelled,
I and the young man, to this country of yours, where he sold his
venture and bought other investment of country stuffs and continued his
journey to Egypt But it was my lot to abide here, so that these things
befell me in my strangerhood which befell last night, and is not this
tale, O King of the age, more wondrous and marvellous than the story of
the Hunchback? "Not so," quoth the King, "I cannot accept it: there is
no help for it but that you be hanged, every one of you."—And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-seventh Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the King of
China declared "There is no help for it but that you be hanged," the
Reeve of the Sultan's Kitchen came forward and said, "If thou permit me
I will tell thee a tale of what befell me just before I found this
Gobbo, and, if it be more wondrous than his story, do thou grant us our
lives." And when the King answered "Yes" he began to recount


The Reeve’s Tale.


Know, O King, that last night I was at a party where they made a
perlection of the Koran and got together doctors of law and religion
skilled in recitation and intoning; and, when the readers ended, the
table was spread and amongst other things they set before us was a
marinated ragout[FN#553] flavoured with cumin seed. So we sat down, but
one of our number held back and refused to touch it. We conjured him to
eat of it but he swore he would not; and, when we again pressed him, he
said, "Be not instant with me; sufficeth me that which hath already
befallen me through eating it", and he began reciting:

"Shoulder thy tray and go straight to thy goal; * And, if suit thee
this Kohl why,-use this Kohl!"[FN#554]


When he ended his verse we said to him, "Allah upon thee, tell us thy
reason for refusing to eat of the cumin ragout?" “If so it be,” he
replied, "and needs must I eat of it, I will not do so except I wash my
hand forty times with soap, forty times with potash and forty times
with galangale,[FN#555] the total being one hundred and twenty
washings." Thereupon the hospitable host bade his slaves bring water
and whatso he required; and the young man washed his hand as afore
mentioned. Then he sat down, as if disgusted and frightened withal, and
dipping his hand in the ragout, began eating and at the same time
showing signs of anger. And we wondered at him with extreme wonderment,
for his hand trembled and the morsel in it shook and we saw that his
thumb had been cut off and he ate with his four fingers only. So we
said to him, "Allah upon thee, what happened to thy thumb? Is thy hand
thus by the creation of God or hath some accident befallen it?" "O my
brothers," he answered, "it is not only thus with this thumb, but also
with my other thumb and with both my great toes, as you shall see." So
saying he uncovered his left hand and his feet, and we saw that the
left hand was even as the right and in like manner that each of his
feet lacked its great toe. When we saw him after this fashion, our
amazement waxed still greater and we said to him, "We have hardly
patience enough to await thy history and to hear the manner of the
cutting off of thy thumbs, and the reason of thy washing both hands one
hundred and twenty times." Know then, said he, that my father was chief
of the merchants and the wealthiest of them all in Baghdad city during
the reign of the Caliph Harun al Rashid; and he was much given to wine
drinking and listening to the lute and the other instruments of
pleasaunce; so that when he died he left nothing. I buried him and had
perlections of the Koran made for him, and mourned for him days and
nights: then I opened his shop and found that he had left in it few
goods, while his debts were many. However I compounded with his
creditors for time to settle their demands and betook myself to buying
and selling, paying them something from week to week on account; and I
gave not over doing this till I had cleared off his obligations in full
and began adding to my principal. One day, as I sat in my shop,
suddenly and unexpectedly there appeared before me a young lady, than
whom I never saw a fairer, wearing the richest raiment and ornaments
and riding a she mule, with one negro slave walking before her and
another behind her. She drew rein at the head of the exchange bazar and
entered followed by an eunuch who said to her, "O my lady come out and
away without telling anyone, lest thou light a fire which will burn us
all up." Moreover he stood before her guarding her from view whilst she
looked at the merchants' shops. She found none open but mine; so she
came up with the eunuch behind her and sitting down in my shop saluted
me; never heard I aught fairer than her speech or sweeter than her
voice. Then she unveiled her face, and I saw that she was like the moon
and I stole a glance at her whose sight caused me a thousand sighs, and
my heart was captivated with love of her, and I kept looking again and
again upon her face repeating these verses:—

"Say to the charmer in the dove hued veil, * Death would be welcome to
abate thy bale!
Favour me with thy favours that I live: * See, I stretch forth my palm
to take thy vail!


When she heard my verse she answered me saying:—

"I've lost all patience by despite of you; * My heart knows nothing
save love plight to you!
If aught I sight save charms so bright of you; * My parting end not in
the sight of you!
I swear I'll ne'er forget the right of you; * And fain this breast
would soar to height of you:
You made me drain the love cup, and I lief * A love cup tender for
delight of you:
Take this my form where'er you go, and when * You die, entomb me in the
site of you:
Call on me in my grave, and hear my bones * Sigh their responses to the
shright of you:
And were I asked 'Of God what wouldst thou see?' * I answer, 'first His
will then Thy decree!'


When she ended her verse she asked me, "O youth, hast thou any fair
stuffs by thee?"; and I answered, "O my lady, thy slave is poor; but
have patience till the merchants open their shops, and I will suit thee
with what thou wilt." Then we sat talking, I and she (and I was drowned
in the sea of her love, dazed in the desert[FN#556] of my passion for
her), till the merchants opened their shops; when I rose and fetched
her all she sought to the tune of five thousand dirhams. She gave the
stuff to the eunuch and, going forth by the door of the Exchange, she
mounted mule and went away, without telling me whence she came, and I
was ashamed to speak of such trifle. When the merchants dunned me for
the price, I made myself answerable for five thousand dirhams and went
home, drunken with the love of her. They set supper before me and I ate
a mouthful, thinking only of her beauty and loveliness, and sought to
sleep, but sleep came not to me. And such was my condition for a whole
week, when the merchants required their monies of me, but I persuaded
them to have patience for another week, at the end of which time she
again appeared mounted on a she mule and attended by her eunuch and two
slaves. She saluted me and said, "O my master, we have been long in
bringing thee the price of the stuffs; but now fetch the Shroff and
take thy monies." So I sent for the money changer and the eunuch
counted out the coin before him and made it over to me. Then we sat
talking, I and she, till the market opened, when she said to me, "Get
me this and that." So I got her from the merchants whatso she wanted,
and she took it and went away without saying a word to me about the
price. As soon as she was out of sight, I repented me of what I had
done; for the worth of the stuffs bought for her amounted to a thousand
dinars, and I said in my soul, "What manner of love is this? She hath
brought me five thousand dirhams, and hath taken goods for a thousand
dinars."[FN#557] I feared lest I should be beggared through having to
pay the merchants their money, and I said, "They know none other but
me; this lovely lady is naught but a cheat and a swindler, who hath
diddled me with her beauty and grace; for she saw that I was a mere
youth and laughed at me for not asking her address." I ceased not to be
troubled by these doubts and fears, as she was absent more than a
month, till the merchants pestered me for their money and were so hard
upon me that I put up my property for sale and stood on the very brink
of ruin. However, as I was sitting in my shop one day, drowned in
melancholy musings, she suddenly rode up and, dismounting at the bazar
gate, came straight towards me. When I saw her all my cares fell from
me and I forgot every trouble. She came close up to me and greeted me
with her sweet voice and pleasant speech and presently said, "Fetch me
the Shroff and weigh thy money."[FN#558] So she gave me the price of
what goods I had gotten for her and more, and fell to talking freely
with me, till I was like to die of joy and delight. Presently she asked
me, "Hast thou a wife?"; and I answered "No, indeed: I have never known
woman"; and began to shed tears. Quoth she "Why weepest thou?" Quoth I
"It is nothing!" Then giving the eunuch some of the gold pieces, I
begged him to be go between[FN#559] in the matter; but he laughed and
said, "She is more in love with thee than thou with her: she hath no
occasion for the stuffs she hath bought of thee and did all this only
for the love of thee; so ask of her what thou wilt and she will deny
thee nothing." When she saw me giving the dinars to the eunuch, she
returned and sat down again; and I said to her, "Be charitable to thy
slave and pardon him what he is about to say." Then I told her what was
in my mind and she assented and said to the eunuch, "Thou shalt carry
my message to him," adding to me, "And do thou whatso the eunuch
biddeth thee." Then she got up and went away, and I paid the merchants
their monies and they all profited; but as for me, regret at the
breaking off of our intercourse was all my gain; and I slept not the
whole of that night. However, before many days passed her eunuch came
to me, and I entreated him honourably and asked him after his mistress.
"Truly she is sick with love of thee," he replied and I rejoined, "Tell
me who and what she is." Quoth he, "The Lady Zubaydah, queen consort of
Harun al-Rashid, brought her up as a rearling[FN#560] and hath advanced
her to be stewardess of the Harim, and gave her the right of going in
and out of her own sweet will. She spoke to her lady of thee and begged
her to marry her to thee; but she said, 'I will not do this, till I see
the young man; and, if he be worthy of thee, I will marry thee to him.'
So now we look for the moment to smuggle thee into the Palace and if
thou succeed in entering privily thou wilt win thy wish to wed her; but
if the affair get wind, the Lady Zubaydah will strike off thy
head.[FN#561] What sayest thou to this?" I answered, "I will go with
thee and abide the risk whereof thou speakest." Then said he, "As soon
as it is night, go to the Mosque built by the Lady Zubaydah on the
Tigris and pray the night prayers and sleep there." "With love and
gladness," cried I. So at nightfall I repaired to the Mosque, where I
prayed and passed the night. With earliest dawn, behold, came sundry
eunuchs in a skiff with a number of empty chests which they deposited
in the Mosque; then all of them went their ways but one, and looking
curiously at him, I saw he was our go between. Presently in came the
handmaiden, my mistress, walking straight up to us; and I rose to her
and embraced her while she kissed me and shed tears.[FN#562] We talked
awhile; after which she made me get into one of the chests which she
locked upon me. Presently the other eunuchs came back with a quantity
of packages and she fell to stowing them in the chests, which she
locked down, one by one, till all were shut. When all was done the
eunuchs embarked the chests in the boat and made for the Lady
Zubaydah's palace. With this, thought began to beset me and I said to
myself, "Verily thy lust and wantonness will be the death of thee; and
the question is after all shalt thou win to thy wish or not?" And I
began to weep, boxed up as I was in the box and suffering from cramp;
and I prayed Allah that He deliver me from the dangerous strait I was
in, whilst the boat gave not over going on till it reached the Palace
gate where they lifted out the chests and amongst them that in which I
was. Then they carried them in, passing through a troop of eunuchs,
guardians of the Harim and of the ladies behind the curtain, till they
came to the post of the Eunuch in Chief[FN#563] who started up from his
slumbers and shouted to the damsel "What is in those chests?" "They are
full of wares for the Lady Zubaydah!" "Open them, one by one, that I
may see what is in them." "And wherefore wouldst thou open them?" "Give
me no words and exceed not in talk! These chests must and shall be
opened." So saying, he sprang to his feet, and the first which they
brought to him to open was that wherein I was; and, when I felt his
hands upon it, my senses failed me and I bepissed myself in my funk,
the water running out of the box. Then said she to the Eunuch in Chief,
"O steward! thou wilt cause me to be killed and thyself too, for thou
hast damaged goods worth ten thousand dinars. This chest contains
coloured dresses, and four gallon flasks of Zemzem water;[FN#564] and
now one of them hath got unstoppered and the water is running out over
the clothes and it will spoil their colours." The eunuch answered,
"Take up thy boxes and get thee gone to the curse of God!" So the
slaves carried off all the chests, including mine; and hastened on with
them till suddenly I heard the voice of one saying, "Alack, and alack!
the Caliph! the Caliph !" When that cry struck mine ears I died in my
skin and said a saying which never yet shamed the sayer, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I
and only I have brought this calamity upon myself." Presently I heard
the Caliph say to my mistress, "A plague on thee, what is in those
boxes?"; and she answered, "Dresses for the Lady Zubaydah";[FN#565]
whereupon he, "Open them before me!" When I heard this I died my death
outright and said to myself, "By Allah, today is the very last of my
days in this world: if I come safe out of this I am to marry her and no
more words, but detection stares me in the face and my head is as good
as stricken off." Then I repeated the profession of Faith, saying,
"There is no god but the God, and Mohammed is the Apostle of God!"—And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

When it was the Twenty-eighth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued as follows: Now when I testified, "I bear witness
that there is no god save the God," I heard my mistress the handmaid
declare to the Caliph, "These chests, O Commander of the Faithful, have
been committed to my charge by the Lady Zubaydah, and she doth not wish
their contents to be seen by any one." "No matter!" quoth the Caliph,
"needs must they be opened, I will see what is in them"; and he cried
aloud to the eunuchs, "Bring the chests here before me." At this I made
sure of death (without benefit of a doubt) and swooned away. Then the
eunuchs brought the chests up to him one after another and he fell to
inspecting the contents, but he saw in them only ottars and stuffs and
fine dresses; and they ceased not opening the chests and he ceased not
looking to see what was in them, finding only clothes and such matters,
till none remained unopened but the box in which I was boxed. They put
forth their hands to open it, but my mistress the handmaid made haste
and said to the Caliph, "This one thou shalt see only in the presence
of the Lady Zubaydah, for that which is in it is her secret." When he
heard this he gave orders to carry in the chests; so they took up that
wherein I was and bore it with the rest into the Harim and set it down
in the midst of the saloon; and indeed my spittle was dried up for very
fear.[FN#566] Then my mistress opened the box and took me out, saying,
"Fear not: no harm shall betide thee now nor dread; but broaden thy
breast and strengthen thy heart and sit thee down till the Lady
Zubaydah come, and surely thou shalt win thy wish of me." So I sat down
and, after a while, in came ten hand maidens, virgins like moons, and
ranged themselves in two rows, five facing five; and after them twenty
other damsels, high bosomed virginity, surrounding the Lady Zubaydah
who could hardly walk for the weight of her raiment and ornaments. As
she drew near, the slave girls dispersed from around her, and I
advanced and kissed the ground between her hands. She signed to me to
sit and, when I sat down before her chair, she began questioning me of
my forbears and family and condition, to which I made such answers that
pleased her, and she said to my mistress, "Our nurturing of thee, O
damsel, hath not disappointed us." Then she said to me, "Know that this
handmaiden is to us even as our own child and she is a trust committed
to thee by Allah." I again kissed the ground before her, well pleased
that I should marry my mistress, and she bade me abide ten days in the
palace. So I abode there ten days, during which time I saw not my
mistress nor anybody save one of the concubines, who brought me the
morning and evening meals. After this the Lady Zubaydah took counsel
with the Caliph on the marriage of her favourite handmaid, and he gave
leave and assigned to her a wedding portion of ten thousand gold
pieces. So the Lady Zubaydah sent for the Kazi and witnesses who wrote
our marriage contract, after which the women made ready sweetmeats and
rich viands and distributed them among all the Odahs[FN#567] of the
Harim. Thus they did other ten days, at the end of which time my
mistress went to the baths.[FN#568] Meanwhile, they set before me a
tray of food where on were various meats and among those dishes, which
were enough to daze the wits, was a bowl of cumin ragout containing
chickens breasts, fricandoed[FN#569] and flavoured with sugar,
pistachios, musk and rose water. Then, by Allah, fair sirs, I did not
long hesitate; but took my seat before the ragout and fell to and ate
of it till I could no more. After this I wiped my hands, but forgot to
wash them; and sat till it grew dark, when the wax candles were lighted
and the singing women came in with their tambourines and proceeded to
display the bride in various dresses and to carry her in procession
from room to room all round the palace, getting their palms crossed
with gold. Then they brought her to me and disrobed her. When I found
myself alone with her on the bed I embraced her, hardly believing in
our union; but she smelt the strong odours of the ragout upon my hands
and forth with cried out with an exceeding loud cry, at which the slave
girls came running to her from all sides. I trembled with alarm,
unknowing what was the matter, and the girls asked her, "What aileth
thee, O our sister?" She answered them, "Take this mad man away from
me: I had thought he was a man of sense!" Quoth I to her, "What makes
thee think me mad?" Quoth she, "Thou madman' what made thee eat of
cumin ragout and forget to wash thy hand? By Allah, I will requite thee
for thy misconduct. Shall the like of thee come to bed with the like of
me with unclean hands?"[FN#570] Then she took from her side a plaited
scourge and came down with it on my back and the place where I sit till
her forearms were benumbed and I fainted away from the much beating;
when she said to the handmaids, "Take him and carry him to the Chief of
Police, that he may strike off the hand wherewith he ate of the cumin
ragout, and which he did not wash." When I heard this I said, "There is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Wilt thou cut off my
hand, because I ate of a cumin ragout and did not wash?" The
handmaidens also interceded with her and kissed her hand saying, "O our
sister, this man is a simpleton, punish him not for what he hath done
this nonce;" but she answered, "By Allah, there is no help but that I
dock him of somewhat, especially the offending member." Then she went
away and I saw no more of her for ten days, during which time she sent
me meat and drink by a slave girl who told me that she had fallen sick
from the smell of the cumin ragout. After that time she came to me and
said, "O black of face![FN#571] I will teach thee how to eat cumin
ragout without washing thy hands!" Then she cried out to the handmaids,
who pinioned me; and she took a sharp razor and cut off my thumbs and
great toes; even as you see, O fair assembly! Thereupon I swooned away,
and she sprinkled some powder of healing herbs upon the stumps and when
the blood was staunched, I said, "Never again will I eat of cumin
ragout without washing my hands forty times with potash and forty times
with galangale and forty times with soap!" And she took of me an oath
and bound me by a covenant to that effect. When, therefore, you brought
me the cumin ragout my colour changed and I said to myself, "It was
this very dish that caused the cutting off of my thumbs and great
toes;" and, when you forced me, I said, "Needs must I fulfil the oath I
have sworn." "And what befell thee after this?" asked those present;
and he answered, "When I swore to her, her anger was appeased and I
slept with her that night. We abode thus awhile till she said to me one
day, "Verily the Palace of the Caliph is not a pleasant place for us to
live in, and none ever entered it save thyself; and thou only by grace
of the Lady Zubaydah. Now she hath given me fifty thousand dinars,"
adding, "Take this money and go out and buy us a fair dwelling house."
So I fared forth and bought a fine and spacious mansion, whither she
removed all the wealth she owned and what riches I had gained in stuffs
and costly rarities. Such is the cause of the cutting off of my thumbs
and great toes. We ate (continued the Reeve), and were returning to our
homes when there befell me with the Hunchback that thou wottest of.
This then is my story, and peace be with thee! Quoth the King; "This
story is on no wise more delectable than the story of the Hunchback;
nay, it is even less so, and there is no help for the hanging of the
whole of you." Then came forward the Jewish physician and kissing the
ground said, "O King of the age, I will tell thee an history more
wonderful than that of the Hunchback." "Tell on," said the King of
China; so he began the


Tale of the Jewish Doctor.


Right marvellous was a matter which came to pass to me in my youth. I
lived in Damascus of Syria studying my art and, one day, as I was
sitting at home behold, there came to me a Mameluke from the household
of the Sahib and said to me, "Speak with my lord!" So I followed him to
the Viceroy's house and, entering the great hall, saw at its head a
couch of cedar plated with gold whereon lay a sickly youth beautiful
withal; fairer than he one could not see. I sat down by his head and
prayed to Heaven for a cure; and he made me a sign with his eyes, so I
said to him, "O my lord! favour me with thy hand, and safety be with
thee!"[FN#572] Then he put forth his left hand and I marvelled thereat
and said, "By Allah, strange that this handsome youth, the son of a
great house, should so lack good manners. This can be nothing but pride
and conceit!" However I felt his pulse and wrote him a prescription and
continued to visit him for ten days, at the end of which time he
recovered and went to the Hammam,[FN#573] whereupon the Viceroy gave me
a handsome dress of honour and appointed me superintendent of the
hospital which is in Damascus.[FN#574] I accompanied him to the baths,
the whole of which they had kept private for his accommodation; and the
servants came in with him and took off his clothes within the bath, and
when he was stripped I saw that his right hand had been newly cut off,
and this was the cause of his weakliness. At this I was amazed and
grieved for him: then, looking at his body, I saw on it the scars of
scourge stripes whereto he had applied unguents. I was troubled at the
sight and my concern appeared in my face. The young man looked at me
and, comprehending the matter, said, "O Physician of the age, marvel
not at my case; I will tell thee my story as soon as we quit the
baths." Then we washed and, returning to his house, ate somewhat of
food and took rest awhile; after which he asked me, "What sayest thou
to solacing thee by inspecting the supper hall?"; and I answered "So
let it be." Thereupon he ordered the slaves to carry out the carpets
and cushions required and roast a lamb and bring us some fruit. They
did his bidding and we ate together, he using the left hand for the
purpose. After a while I said to him, "Now tell me thy tale." "O
Physician of the age," replied he, "hear what befell me. Know that I am
of the sons of Mosul, where my grandfather died leaving nine children
of whom my father was the eldest. All grew up and took to them wives,
but none of them was blessed with offspring except my father, to whom
Providence vouchsafed me. So I grew up amongst my uncles who rejoiced
in me with exceeding joy, till I came to man's estate. One day which
happened to be a Friday, I went to the Cathedral mosque of Mosul with
my father and my uncles, and we prayed the congregational prayers,
after which the folk went forth, except my father and uncles, who sat
talking of wondrous things in foreign parts and the marvellous sights
of strange cities. At last they mentioned Egypt, and one of my uncles
said, "Travellers tell us that there is not on earth's face aught
fairer than Cairo and her Nile;" and these words made me long to see
Cairo. Quoth my father, "Whoso hath not seen Cairo hath not seen the
world. Her dust is golden and her Nile a miracle holden; and her women
are as Houris fair; puppets, beautiful pictures; her houses are palaces
rare; her water is sweet and light[FN#575] and her mud a commodity and
a medicine beyond compare, even as said the poet in this his poetry:—

The Nile[FN#576] flood this day is the gain you own; * You alone in
such gain and bounties wone:
The Nile is my tear flood of severance, * And here none is forlorn but
I alone.


Moreover temperate is her air, and with fragrance blent, Which
surpasseth aloes wood in scent; and how should it be otherwise, she
being the Mother of the World? And Allah favour him who wrote these
lines:—

An I quit Cairo and her pleasaunces, * Where can I wend to find so
gladsome ways?
Shall I desert that site, whose grateful scents * Joy every soul and
call for loudest praise?
Where every palace, as another Eden, * Carpets and cushions richly
wrought displays;
A city wooing sight and sprite to glee, * Where Saint meets Sinner and
each 'joys his craze;
Where friend meets friend, by Providence united * In greeny garden and
in palmy maze:
People of Cairo, and by Allah's doom * I fare, with you in thoughts I
wone always!
Whisper not Cairo in the ear of Zephyr, * Lest for her like of garden
scents he reave her.[FN#577]


And if your eyes saw her earth, and the adornment thereof with bloom,
and the purfling of it with all manner blossoms, and the islands of the
Nile and how much is therein of wide spread and goodly prospect, and if
you bent your sight upon the Abyssinian Pond,[FN#578] your glance would
not revert from the scene quit of wonder; for nowhere would you behold
the fellow of that lovely view; and, indeed, the two arms of the Nile
embrace most luxuriant verdure,[FN#579] as the white of the eye
encompasseth its black or like filagree'd silver surrounding
chrysolites. And divinely gifted was the poet who there anent said
these couplets:—

By th' Abyssinian Pond, O day divine!* In morning twilight and in sunny
shine:
The water prisoned in its verdurous walls, * Like sabre flashes before
shrinking eyne:
And in The Garden sat we while it drains * Slow draught, with purfled
sides dyed finest fine:
The stream is rippled by the hands of clouds; * We too, a-rippling, on
our rugs recline,
Passing pure wine, and whoso leaves us there * Shall ne'er arise from
fall his woes design:
Draining long draughts from large and brimming bowls, * Administ'ring
thirst's only medicine—wine.


And what is there to compare with the Rasad, the Observatory, and its
charms whereof every viewer as he approacheth saith, 'Verily this spot
is specialised with all manner of excellence!' And if thou speak of the
Night of Nile full,[FN#580] give the rainbow and distribute it![FN#581]
And if thou behold The Garden at eventide, with the cool shades sloping
far and wide, a marvel thou wouldst see and wouldst incline to Egypt in
ecstasy. And wert thou by Cairo's river side,[FN#582] when the sun is
sinking and the stream dons mail coat and habergeon[FN#583] over its
other vestments, thou wouldst be quickened to new life by its gentle
zephyrs and by its all sufficient shade." So spake he and the rest fell
to describing Egypt and her Nile. As I heard their accounts, my
thoughts dwelt upon the subject and when, after talking their fill, all
arose and went their ways, I lay down to sleep that night, but sleep
came not because of my violent longing for Egypt; and neither meat
pleased me nor drink. After a few days my uncles equipped themselves
for a trade journey to Egypt; and I wept before my father till he made
ready for me fitting merchandise, and he consented to my going with
them, saying however, "Let him not enter Cairo, but leave him to sell
his wares at Damascus." So I took leave of my father and we fared forth
from Mosul and gave not over travelling till we reached Aleppo[FN#584]
where we halted certain days. Then we marched onwards till we made
Damascus and we found her a city as though she were a Paradise,
abounding in trees and streams and birds and fruits of all kinds. We
alighted at one of the Khans, where my uncles tarried awhile selling
and buying; and they bought and sold also on my account, each dirham
turning a profit of five on prime cost, which pleased me mightily.
After this they left me alone and set their faces Egyptwards; whilst I
abode at Damascus, where I had hired from a jeweller, for two dinars a
month, a mansion[FN#585] whose beauties would beggar the tongue. Here I
remained, eating and drinking and spending what monies I had in hand
till, one day, as I was sitting at the door of my house be hold, there
came up a young lady clad in costliest raiment never saw my eyes
richer. I winked[FN#5886 at her and she stepped inside without
hesitation and stood within. I entered with her and shut the door upon
myself and her; whereupon she raised her face veil and threw off her
mantilla, when I found her like a pictured moon of rare and marvellous
loveliness; and love of her gat hold of my heart. So I rose and brought
a tray of the most delicate eatables and fruits and whatso befitted the
occasion, and we ate and played and after that we drank till the wine
turned our heads. Then I lay with her the sweetest of nights and in the
morning I offered her ten gold pieces; when her face lowered and her
eye brows wrinkled and shaking with wrath she cried, "Fie upon thee, O
my sweet companion! dost thou deem that I covet thy money?" Then she
took out from the bosom of her shift[FN#587] fifteen dinars and, laying
them before me, said, "By Allah! unless thou take them I will never
come back to thee." So I accepted them and she said to me, "O my
beloved! expect me again in three days' time, when I will be with thee
between sunset and supper tide; and do thou prepare for us with these
dinars the same entertainment as yesternight." So saying, she took
leave of me and went away and all my senses went with her. On the third
day she came again, clad in stuff weft with gold wire, and wearing
raiment and ornaments finer than before. I had prepared the place for
her ere she arrived and the repast was ready; so we ate and drank and
lay together, as we had done, till the morning, when she gave me other
fifteen gold pieces and promised to come again after three days.
Accordingly, I made ready for her and, at the appointed time, she
presented herself more richly dressed than on the first and second
occasions, and said to me, "O my lord, am I not beautiful?" "Yea, by
Allah thou art!" answered I, and she went on, "Wilt thou allow me to
bring with me a young lady fairer than I, and younger in years, that
she may play with us and thou and she may laugh and make merry and
rejoice her heart, for she hath been very sad this long time past, and
hath asked me to take her out and let her spend the night abroad with
me?" "Yea, by Allah!" I replied; and we drank till the wine turned our
heads and slept till the morning, when she gave me other fifteen
dinars, saying, "Add something to thy usual provision on account of the
young lady who will come with me." Then she went away, and on the
fourth day I made ready the house as usual, and soon after sunset
behold, she came, accompanied by another damsel carefully wrapped in
her mantilla. They entered and sat down; and when I saw them I repeated
these verses:—

"How dear is our day and how lucky our lot, * When the cynic's away
with his tongue malign!
When love and delight and the swimming of head * Send cleverness
trotting, the best boon of wine.
When the full moon shines from the cloudy veil, * And the branchlet
sways in her greens that shine:
When the red rose mantles in freshest cheek, * And Narcissus[FN#588]
opeth his love sick eyne:
When pleasure with those I love is so sweet, * When friendship with
those I love is complete!"


I rejoiced to see them, and lighted the candles after receiving them
with gladness and delight. They doffed their heavy outer dresses and
the new damsel uncovered her face when I saw that she was like the moon
at its full never beheld I aught more beautiful. Then I rose and set
meat and drink before them, and we ate and drank; and I kept giving
mouthfuls to the new comer, crowning her cup and drinking with her till
the first damsel, waxing inwardly jealous, asked me, "By Allah, is she
not more delicious than I?"; whereto I answered, "Ay, by the Lord!" "It
is my wish that thou lie with her this night; for I am thy mistress but
she is our visitor. Upon my head be it, and my eyes." Then she rose and
spread the carpets for our bed[FN#589] and I took the young lady and
lay with her that night till morning, when I awoke and found myself
wet, as I thought, with sweat. I sat up and tried to arouse the damsel;
but when I shook her by the shoulders my hand became crimson with blood
and her head rolled off the pillow. Thereupon my senses fled and I
cried aloud, saying, "O All powerful Protector, grant me Thy
protection!" Then finding her neck had been severed, I sprung up and
the world waxed black before my eyes, and I looked for the lady, my
former love, but could not find her. So I knew that it was she who had
murdered the damsel in her jealousy,[FN#590] and said, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
What is to be done now?" I considered awhile then, doffing my clothes,
dug a hole in the middle of the court yard, wherein I laid the murdered
girl with her jewellery and golden ornaments; and, throwing back the
earth on her, replaced the slabs of the marble[FN#591] pavement. After
this I made the Ghusl or total ablution,[FN#592] and put on pure
clothes; then, taking what money I had left, locked up the house and
summoned courage and went to its owner to whom I paid a year's rent,
saying, "I am about to join my uncles in Cairo." Presently I set out
and, journeying to Egypt, foregathered with my uncles who rejoiced in
me, and I found that they had made an end of selling their merchandise.
They asked me, "What is the cause of thy coming?"; and I answered "I
longed for a sight of you;" but did not let them know that I had any
money with me. I abode with them a year, enjoying the pleasures of
Cairo and her Nile,[FN#593] and squandering the rest of my money in
feasting and carousing till the time drew near for the departure of my
uncles, when I fled from them and hid myself. They made enquiries and
sought for me, but hearing no tidings they said, "He will have gone
back to Damascus." When they departed I came forth from my hiding place
and abode in Cairo three years, until naught remained of my money. Now
every year I used to send the rent of the Damascus house to its owner,
until at last I had nothing left but enough to pay him for one year's
rent and my breast was straitened. So I travelled to Damascus and
alighted at the house whose owner, the jeweller, was glad to see me and
I found everything locked up as I had left it. I opened the closets and
took out my clothes and necessaries and came upon, beneath the carpet
bed whereon I had lain that night with the girl who had been beheaded,
a golden necklace set with ten gems of passing beauty. I took it up
and, cleansing it of the blood, sat gazing upon it and wept awhile.
Then I abode in the house two days and on the third I entered the
Hammam and changed my clothes. I had no money by me now; so Satan
whispered temptation to me that the Decree of Destiny be carried out.
Next day I took the jewelled necklace to the bazar and handed it to a
broker who made me sit down in the shop of the jeweller, my landlord,
and bade me have patience till the market was full,[FN#594] when he
carried off the ornament and proclaimed it for sale, privily and
without my knowledge. The necklet was priced as worth two thousand
dinars, but the broker returned to me and said, "This collar is of
copper, a mere counterfeit after the fashion of the Franks[FN#595] and
a thousand dirhams have been bidden for it." "Yes," I answered, "I knew
it to be copper, as we had it made for a certain person that we might
mock her: now my wife hath inherited it and we wish to sell it; so go
and take over the thousand dirhams."—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

When it was the Twenty-ninth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the beautiful
youth said to the broker, "Take over the thousand dirhams;" and when
the broker heard this, he knew that the case was suspicious. So he
carried the collar to the Syndic of the bazar, and the Syndic took it
to the Governor who was also prefect of police, and said to him falsely
enough, "This necklet was stolen from my house, and we have found the
thief in traders' dress." So before I was aware of it the watch got
round me and, making me their prisoner, carried me before the Governor
who questioned me of the collar. I told him the tale I had told to the
broker; but he laughed and said, "These words are not true." Then,
before I knew what was doing, the guard stripped off my clothes and
came down with palm rods upon my ribs, till for the smart of the stick
I confessed, "It was I who stole it;" saying to myself, "'Tis better
for thee to say, I stole it, than to let them know that its owner was
murdered in thy house, for then would they slay thee to avenge her." So
they wrote down that I had stolen it and they cut off my hand and
scalded the stump in oil,[FN#596] when I swooned away for pain; but
they gave me wine to drink and I recovered and, taking up my hand, was
going to my fine house, when my landlord said to me, "Inasmuch, O my
son, as this hath befallen thee, thou must leave my house and look out
for another lodging for thee, since thou art convicted of theft. Thou
art a handsome youth, but who will pity thee after this?" "O my master"
said I, "bear with me but two days or three, till I find me another
place." He answered, "So be it." and went away and left me. I returned
to the house where I sat weeping and saying, How shall I go back to my
own people with my hand lopped off and they know not that I am
innocent? Perchance even after this Allah may order some matter for
me." And I wept with exceeding weeping, grief beset me and I remained
in sore trouble for two days; but on the third day my landlord came
suddenly in to me, and with him some of the guard and the Syndic of the
bazar, who had falsely charged me with stealing the necklet. I went up
to them and asked, "What is the matter?" however, they pinioned me with
out further parley and threw a chain about my neck, saying, "The
necklet which was with thee hath proved to be the property of the Wazir
of Damascus who is also her Viceroy;" and they added, "It was missing
from his house three years ago at the same time as his younger
daughter." When I heard these words, my heart sank within me and I said
to myself, "Thy life is gone beyond a doubt! By Allah, needs must I
tell the Chief my story; and, if he will, let him kill me, and if he
please, let him pardon me." So they carried me to the Wazir's house and
made me stand between his hands. When he saw me, he glanced at me out
of the corner of his eye and said to those present, "Why did ye lop off
his hand? This man is unfortunate, and there is no fault in him; indeed
ye have wronged him in cutting off his hand." When I heard this, I took
heart and, my soul presaging good, I said to him, "By Allah, O my lord,
I am no thief; but they calumniated me with a vile calumny, and they
scourged me midmost the market, bidding me confess till, for the pain
of the rods, I lied against myself and confessed the theft, albeit I am
altogether innocent of it." "Fear not," quoth the Viceroy, "no harm
shall come to thee." Then he ordered the Syndic of the bazar to be
imprisoned and said to him, "Give this man the blood money for his
hand; and, if thou delay I will hang thee and seize all thy property."
Moreover he called to his guards who took him and dragged him away,
leaving me with the Chief. Then they loosed by his command the chain
from my neck and unbound my arms; and he looked at me, and said, "O my
son, be true with me, and tell me how this necklace came to thee." And
he repeated these verses:—

"Truth best befits thee, albeit truth * Shall bring thee to burn on the
threatened fire."


"By Allah, O my lord," answered I, "I will tell thee nothing but the
truth." Then I related to him all that had passed between me and the
first lady, and how she had brought me the second and had slain her out
of jealousy, and I detailed for him the tale to its full. When he heard
my story, he shook his head and struck his right hand upon the
left,[FN#597] and putting his kerchief over his face wept awhile and
then repeated:—

"I see the woes of the world abound, * And worldings sick with spleen
and teen;
There's One who the meeting of two shall part, * And who part not are
few and far between!"


Then he turned to me and said, "Know, O my son, that the elder damsel
who first came to thee was my daughter whom I used to keep closely
guarded. When she grew up, I sent her to Cairo and married her to her
cousin, my brother's son. After a while he died and she came back: but
she had learnt wantonness and ungraciousness from the people of
Cairo;[FN#598] so she visited thee four times and at last brought her
younger sister. Now they were sisters-german and much attached to each
other; and, when that adventure happened to the elder, she disclosed
her secret to her sister who desired to go out with her. So she asked
thy leave and carried her to thee; after which she returned alone and,
finding her weeping, I questioned her of her sister, but she said, 'I
know nothing of her.' However, she presently told her mother privily of
what had happened and how she had cut off her sister's head and her
mother told me. Then she ceased not to weep and say, 'By Allah! I shall
cry for her till I die.' Nor did she give over mourning till her heart
broke and she died; and things fell out after that fashion. See then, O
my son, what hath come to pass; and now I desire thee not to thwart me
in what I am about to offer thee, and it is that I purpose to marry
thee to my youngest daughter; for she is a virgin and born of another
mother;[FN#599] and I will take no dower of thee but, on the contrary,
will appoint thee an allowance, and thou shalt abide with me in my
house in the stead of my son." "So be it," I answered, "and how could I
hope for such good fortune?" Then he sent at once for the Kazi and
witnesses, and let write my marriage contract with his daughter and I
went in to her. Moreover, he got me from the Syndic of the bazar a
large sum of money and I became in high favour with him. During this
year news came to me that my father was dead and the Wazir despatched a
courier, with letters bearing the royal sign manual, to fetch me the
money which my father had left behind him, and now I am living in all
the solace of life. Such was the manner of the cutting off my right
hand." I marvelled at his story (continued the Jew), and I abode with
him three days after which he gave me much wealth, and I set out and
travelled Eastward till I reached this your city and the sojourn suited
me right well; so I took up my abode here and there befell me what thou
knowest with the Hunchback. There upon the King of China shook his
head[FN#600] and said, "This story of thine is not stranger and more
wondrous and marvellous and delectable than the tale of the Hunchback;
and so needs must I hang the whole number of you. However there yet
remains the Tailor who is the head of all the offence;" and he added,
"O Tailor, if thou canst tell me any thing more wonderful than the