The Tale of the Ensorcelled Prince.


Know then, O my lord, that whilome my sire was King of this city, and
his name was Mahmud, entitled Lord of the Black Islands, and owner of
what are now these four mountains. He ruled three score and ten years,
after which he went to the mercy of the Lord and I reigned as Sultan in
his stead. I took to wife my cousin, the daughter of my paternal
uncle,[FN#117] and she loved me with such abounding love that whenever
I was absent she ate not and she drank not until she saw me again. She
cohabited with me for five years till a certain day when she went forth
to the Hammam bath; and I bade the cook hasten to get ready all
requisites for our supper. And I entered this palace and lay down on
the bed where I was wont to sleep and bade two damsels to fan my face,
one sitting by my head and the other at my feet. But I was troubled and
made restless by my wife's absence and could not sleep; for although my
eyes were closed my mind and thoughts were wide awake. Presently I
heard the slave girl at my head say to her at my feet, "O Mas'udah, how
miserable is our master and how wasted in his youth and oh! the pity of
his being so betrayed by our mistress, the accursed whore!"[FN#118] The
other replied, "Yes indeed: Allah curse all faithless women and
adulterous; but the like of our master, with his fair gifts, deserveth
something better than this harlot who lieth abroad every night." Then
quoth she who sat by my head, "Is our lord dumb or fit only for
bubbling that he questioneth her not!" and quoth the other, "Fie on
thee! doth our lord know her ways or doth she allow him his choice?
Nay, more, doth she not drug every night the cup she giveth him to
drink before sleep time, and put Bhang[FN#119] into it? So he sleepeth
and wotteth not whither she goeth, nor what she doeth; but we know that
after giving him the drugged wine, she donneth her richest raiment and
perfumeth herself and then she fareth out from him to be away till
break of day; then she cometh to him, and burneth a pastile under his
nose and he awaketh from his deathlike sleep." When I heard the slave
girl's words, the light became black before my sight and I thought
night would never-fall. Presently the daughter of my uncle came from
the baths; and they set the table for us and we ate and sat together a
fair half hour quaffing our wine as was ever our wont. Then she called
for the particular wine I used to drink before sleeping and reached me
the cup; but, seeming to drink it according to my wont, I poured the
contents into my bosom; and, lying down, let her hear that I was
asleep. Then, behold, she cried, "Sleep out the night, and never wake
again: by Allah, I loathe thee and I loathe thy whole body, and my soul
turneth in disgust from cohabiting with thee; and I see not the moment
when Allah shall snatch away thy life!" Then she rose and donned her
fairest dress and perfumed her person and slung my sword over her
shoulder; and, opening the gates of the palace, went her ill way. I
rose and followed her as she left the palace and she threaded the
streets until she came to the city gate, where she spoke words I
understood not, and the padlocks dropped of themselves as if broken and
the gate leaves opened. She went forth (and I after her without her
noticing aught) till she came at last to the outlying mounds[FN#120]
and a reed fence built about a round roofed hut of mud bricks. As she
entered the door, I climbed upon the roof which commanded a view of the
interior, and lo! my fair cousin had gone in to a hideous negro slave
with his upper lip like the cover of a pot, and his lower like an open
pot; lips which might sweep up sand from the gravel-floor of the cot.
He was to boot a leper and a paralytic, lying upon a strew of sugar
cane trash and wrapped in an old blanket and the foulest rags and
tatters. She kissed the earth before him, and he raised his head so as
to see her and said, "Woe to thee! what call hadst thou to stay away
all this time? Here have been with me sundry of the black brethren, who
drank their wine and each had his young lady, and I was not content to
drink because of thine absence." Then she, "O my lord, my heart's love
and coolth of my eyes,[FN#121] knowest thou not that I am married to my
cousin whose very look I loathe, and hate myself when in his company?
And did not I fear for thy sake, I would not let a single sun arise
before making his city a ruined heap wherein raven should croak and
howlet hoot, and jackal and wolf harbour and loot; nay I had removed
its very stones to the back side of Mount Kaf." [FN#122] Rejoined the
slave, Thou liest, damn thee! Now I swear an oath by the valour and
honour of blackamoor men (and deem not our manliness to be ; the poor
manliness of white men), from today forth if thou stay away till this
hour, I will not keep company with thee nor will I glue my body with
thy body and strum and belly bump Dost play fast and loose with us,
thou cracked pot, that we may satisfy thy dirty lusts? stinkard! bitch!
vilest of the vile whites!" When I heard his words, and saw with my own
eyes what passed between these two wretches, the world waxed dark
before my face and my soul knew not in what place it was. But , my wife
humbly stood up weeping before and wheedling the slave, and saying, O
my beloved, and very fruit of my heart, there is none left to cheer me
but thy dear self; and, if thou cast me off who shall take me in, O my
beloved, O light of my eyes?" And she ceased not weeping and abasing
herself to him until he deigned be reconciled with her. Then was she
right glad and stood up and doffed her clothes, even to her petticoat
trousers, and said, "0 my master what hast thou here for thy handmaiden
to eat? Uncover the basin," he grumbled, "and thou shalt find at the
bottom the broiled bones of some rats we dined on, pick at them, and
then go to that slop pot where thou shalt find some leavings of beer
[FN#123] which thou mayest drink." So she ate and drank and washed her
hands, and went and lay down by the side of the slave, upon the cane
trash and, stripping herself stark naked, she crept in with him under
his foul coverlet and his rags and tatters. When I saw my wife, my
cousin, the daughter of my uncle, do this deed[FN#124] I clean lost my
wits, and climbing down from the roof, I entered and took the sword
which she had with her and drew it, determined to cut down the twain. I
first struck at the slave's neck and thought that the death decree had
fallen on him:"And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

When it was the Eighth Night,


She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
ensorcelled Prince said to the King, "When I smote the slave with
intent to strike off his head, I thought that I had slain him; for he
groaned a loud hissing groan, but I had cut only the skin and flesh of
the gullet and the two arteries! It awoke the daughter of my uncle, so
I sheathed the sword and fared forth for the city; and, entering the
palace, lay upon my bed and slept till morning when my wife aroused me
and I saw that she had cut off her hair and had donned mourning
garments. Quoth she:—O son of my uncle, blame me not for what I do; it
hath just reached me that my mother is dead, and my father hath been
killed in holy war, and of my brothers one hath lost his life by a
snake sting and the other by falling down some precipice; and I can and
should do naught save weep and lament. When I heard her words I
refrained from all reproach and said only:—Do as thou list; I certainly
will not thwart thee. She continued sorrowing, weeping and wailing one
whole year from the beginning of its circle to the end, and when it was
finished she said to me.—I wish to build me in thy palace a tomb with a
cupola, which I will set apart for my mourning and will name the House
of Lamentations.[FN#125] Quoth I again:—Do as thou list! Then she
builded for herself a cenotaph wherein to mourn, and set on its centre
a dome under which showed a tomb like a Santon's sepulchre. Thither she
carried the slave and lodged him; but he was exceeding weak by reason
of his wound, and unable to do her love service; he could only drink
wine and from the day of his hurt he spake not a word, yet he lived on
because his appointed hour[FN#126] was not come. Every day, morning and
evening, my wife went to him and wept and wailed over him and gave him
wine and strong soups, and left not off doing after this manner a
second year; and I bore with her patiently and paid no heed to her. One
day, however, I went in to her unawares; and I found her weeping and
beating her face and crying:—Why art thou absent from my sight, O my
heart's delight? Speak to me, O my life; talk with me, O my love? Then
she recited these verses:—

For your love my patience fails and albeit you forget * I may not, nor
to other love my heart can make reply:
Bear my body, bear my soul wheresoever you may fare * And where you
pitch the camp let my body buried lie:
Cry my name above my grave, and an answer shall return * The moaning of
my bones responsive to your cry.[FN#127]


Then she recited, weeping bitterly the while:—

The day of my delight is the day when draw you near * And the day of
mine affright is the day you turn away:
Though I tremble through the night in my bitter dread of death * When I
hold you in my arms I am free from all affray


Once more she began reciting:—

Though a morn I may awake with all happiness in hand * Though the world
all be mine and like Kisra-kings[FN#128] I reign;
To me they had the worth of the winglet of the gnat * When I fail to
see thy form, when I look for thee in vain


When she had ended for a time her words and her weeping I said to her—O
my cousin, let this thy mourning suffice, for in pouring forth tears
there is little profit! Thwart me not, answered she, in aught I do, or
I will lay violent hands on myself! So I held my peace and left her to
go her own way; and she ceased not to cry and keen and indulge her
affliction for yet another year. At the end of the third year I waxed
aweary of this longsome mourning, and one day I happened to enter the
cenotaph when vexed and angry with some matter which had thwarted me,
and suddenly I heard her say:—O my lord, I never hear thee vouch safe a
single word to me! Why dost thou not answer me, O my master? and she
began reciting:—

O thou tomb! O, thou tomb! be his beauty set in shade? * Hast thou
darkened that countenance all sheeny as the noon?
O thou tomb! neither earth nor yet heaven art to me * Then how cometh
it in thee are conjoined my sun and moon?


When I heard such verses as these rage was heaped upon my rage I cried
out:—Well away! how long is this sorrow to last? and I began
repeating:—

O thou tomb! O thou tomb! be his horrors set in blight? * Hast thou
darkenèd his countenance that sickeneth the soul?
O thou tomb! neither cess pool nor pipkin art to me * Then how cometh
it in thee are conjoined soil and coal?


When she heard my words she sprang to her feet crying.—Fie upon thee,
thou cur! all this is of thy doings; thou hast wounded my heart s
darling and thereby worked me sore woe and thou hast wasted his youth
so that these three years he hath lain abed more dead than alive! In my
wrath I cried:—O thou foulest of harlots and filthiest of whores ever
futtered by negro slaves who are hired to have at thee![FN#129] Yes
indeed it was I who did this good deed; and snatching up my sword I
drew it and made at her to cut her down. But she laughed my words and
mine intent to scorn crying: To heel, hound that thou art! Alas[FN#130]
for the past which shall no more come to pass nor shall any one avail
the dead to raise. Allah hath indeed now given into my hand him who did
to me this thing, a deed that hath burned my heart with a fire which
died not and a flame which might not be quenched! Then she stood up;
and, pronouncing some words to me unintelligible, she said:— By virtue
of my egromancy become thou half stone and half man; whereupon I became
what thou seest, unable to rise or to sit, and neither dead nor alive.
Moreover she ensorcelled the city with all its streets and garths, and
she turned by her gramarye the four islands into four mountains around
the tarn whereof thou questionest me; and the citizens, who were of
four different faiths, Moslem, Nazarene, Jew and Magian, she
transformed by her enchantments into fishes; the Moslems are the white,
the Magians red, the Christians blue and the Jews yellow.[FN#131] And
every day she tortureth me and scourgeth me with an hundred stripes,
each of which draweth floods of blood and cutteth the skin of my
shoulders to strips; and lastly she clotheth my upper half with a hair
cloth and then throweth over them these robes." Hereupon the young man
again shed tears and began reciting:—

In patience, O my God, I endure my lot and fate; * I will bear at will
of Thee whatsoever be my state:
They oppress me; they torture me; they make my life a woe * Yet haply
Heaven's happiness shall compensate my strait:
Yea, straitened is my life by the bane and hate o' foes * But Mustafa
and Murtaza[FN#132] shall ope me Heaven's gate.


After this the Sultan turned towards the young Prince and said, "O
youth, thou hast removed one grief only to add another grief; but now,
O my friend, where is she; and where is the mausoleum wherein lieth the
wounded slave?" "The slave lieth under yon dome," quoth the young man,
"and she sitteth in the chamber fronting yonder door. And every day at
sunrise she cometh forth, and first strippeth me, and whippeth me with
an hundred strokes of the leathern scourge, and I weep and shriek; but
there is no power of motion in my lower limbs to keep her off me. After
ending her tormenting me she visiteth the slave, bringing him wine and
boiled meats. And to morrow at an early hour she will be here." Quoth
the King, "By Allah, O youth, I will assuredly do thee a good deed
which the world shall not willingly let die, and an act of derring do
which shall be chronicled long after I am dead and gone by." Then the
King sat him by the side of the young Prince and talked till nightfall,
when he lay down and slept; but, as soon as the false dawn[FN#133]
showed, he arose and doffing his outer garments[FN#134] bared his blade
and hastened to the place wherein lay the slave. Then was he ware of
lighted candles and lamps, and the perfume of incenses and unguents,
and directed by these, he made for the slave and struck him one stroke
killing him on the spot: after which he lifted him on his back and
threw him into a well that was in the palace. Presentry he returned
and, donning the slave's gear, lay down at length within the mausoleum
with the drawn sword laid close to and along his side. After an hour or
so the accursed witch came; and, first going to her husband, she
stripped off his clothes and, taking a whip, flogged him cruelly while
he cried out, "Ah! enough for me the case I am in! take pity on me, O
my cousin!' But she replied, "Didst thou take pity on me and spare the
life of my true love on whom I coated?" Then she drew the cilice over
his raw and bleeding skin and threw the robe upon all and went down to
the slave with a goblet of wine and a bowl of meat broth in her hands.
She entered under the dome weeping and wailing, "Well-away!" and
crying, "O my lord! speak a word to me! O my master! talk awhile with
me!" and began to recite these couplets.—

How long this harshness, this unlove, shall bide? * Suffice thee not
tear floods thou hast espied?
Thou dost prolong our parting purposely * And if wouldst please my foe,
thou'rt satisfied!


Then she wept again and said, "O my lord! speak to me, talk with me!"
The King lowered his voice and, twisting his tongue, spoke after the
fashion of the blackamoors and said "'lack! 'lack! there be no Ma'esty
and there be no Might save in Allauh, the Gloriose, the Great!" Now
when she heard these words she shouted for joy, and fell to the ground
fainting; and when her senses returned she asked, "O my lord, can it be
true that thou hast power of speech?" and the King making his voice
small and faint answered, "O my cuss! dost thou deserve that I talk to
thee and speak with thee?" "Why and wherefore?" rejoined she; and he
replied "The why is that all the livelong day thou tormentest thy
hubby; and he keeps calling on 'eaven for aid until sleep is strange to
me even from evenin' till mawnin', and he prays and damns, cussing us
two, me and thee, causing me disquiet and much bother: were this not
so, I should long ago have got my health; and it is this which prevents
my answering thee." Quoth she, "With thy leave I will release him from
what spell is on him;"and quoth the King, "Release him and let's have
some rest!" She cried, "To hear is to obey;" and, going from the
cenotaph to the palace, she took a metal bowl and filled it with water
and spake over it certain words which made the contents bubble and boil
as a cauldron seetheth over the fire. With this she sprinkled her
husband saying, "By virtue of the dread words I have spoken, if thou
becamest thus by my spells, come forth out of that form into thine own
former form." And lo and behold! the young man shook and trembled; then
he rose to his feet and, rejoicing at his deliverance, cried aloud, "I
testify that there is no god but the God, and in very truth Mohammed is
His Apostle, whom Allah bless and keep!" Then she said to him, "Go
forth and return not hither, for if thou do I will surely slay thee;"
screaming these words in his face. So he went from between her hands;
and she returned to the dome and, going down to the sepulchre, she
said, "O my lord, come forth to me that I may look upon thee and thy
goodliness!" The King replied in faint low words, "What[FN#135] thing
hast thou done? Thou hast rid me of the branch but not of the root."
She asked, "O my darling! O my negroling! what is the root?" And he
answered, "Fie on thee, O my cuss! The people of this city and of the
four islands every night when it's half passed lift their heads from
the tank in which thou hast turned them to fishes and cry to Heaven and
call down its anger on me and thee; and this is the reason why my
body's baulked from health. Go at once and set them free then come to
me and take my hand, and raise me up, for a little strength is already
back in me." When she heard the King's words (and she still supposed
him to be the slave) she cried joyously, “O my master, on my head and
on my eyes be thy command, Bismillah[FN#136]!” So she sprang to her
feet and, full of joy and gladness, ran down to the tarn and took a
little of its water in the palm of her hand—And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

When it Was the Ninth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the young
woman, the sorceress, took in hand some of the tarn water and spake
over it words not to be understood, the fishes lifted their heads and
stood up on the instant like men, the spell on the people of the city
having been removed. What was the lake again became a crowded capital;
the bazars were thronged with folk who bought and sold; each citizen
was occupied with his own calling and the four hills became islands as
they were whilome. Then the young woman, that wicked sorceress,
returned to the King and (still thinking he was the negro) said to him,
O my love! stretch forth thy honoured hand that I may assist thee to
rise." "Nearer to me," quoth the King in a faint and feigned tone. She
came close as to embrace him when he took up the sword lying hid by his
side and smote her across the breast, so that the point showed gleaming
behind her back. Then he smote her a second time and cut her in twain
and cast her to the ground in two halves. After which he fared forth
and found the young man, now freed from the spell, awaiting him and
gave him joy of his happy release while the Prince kissed his hand with
abundant thanks. Quoth the King, "Wilt thou abide in this city or go
with me to my capital?" Quoth the youth, "O King of the age, wottest
thou not what journey is between thee and thy city?" "Two days and a
half," answered he, whereupon said the other, "An thou be sleeping, O
King, awake! Between thee and thy city is a year's march for a well
girt walker, and thou haddest not come hither in two days and a half
save that the city was under enchantment. And I, O King, will never
part from thee; no, not even for the twinkling of an eye." The King
rejoiced at his words and said, "Thanks be to Allah who hath bestowed
thee upon me! From this hour thou art my son and my only son, for that
in all my life I have never been blessed with issue." Thereupon they
embraced and joyed with exceeding great joy; and, reaching the palace,
the Prince who had been spell bound informed his lords and his grandees
that he was about to visit the Holy Places as a pilgrim, and bade them
get ready all things necessary for the occasion. The preparations
lasted ten days, after which he set out with the Sultan, whose heart
burned in yearning for his city whence he had been absent a whole
twelvemonth. They journeyed with an escort of Mamelukes[FN#137]
carrying all manners of precious gifts and rarities, nor stinted they
wayfaring day and night for a full year until they approached the
Sultan's capital, and sent on messengers to announce their coming. Then
the Wazir and the whole army came out to meet him in joy and gladness,
for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their King; and the
troops kissed the ground before him and wished him joy of his safety.
He entered and took seat upon his throne and the Minister came before
him and, when acquainted with all that had befallen the young Prince,
he congratulated him on his narrow escape. When order was restored
throughout the land the King gave largesse to many of his people, and
said to the Wazir, "Hither the Fisherman who brought us the fishes!" So
he sent for the man who had been the first cause of the city and the
citizens being delivered from enchantment and, when he came into the
presence, the Sultan bestowed upon him a dress of honour, and
questioned him of his condition and whether he had children. The
Fisherman gave him to know that he had two daughters and a son, so the
King sent for them and, taking one daughter to wife, gave the other to
the young Prince and made the son his head treasurer. Furthermore he
invested his Wazir with the Sultanate of the City in the Black Islands
whilome belonging to the young Prince, and dispatched with him the
escort of fifty armed slaves together with dresses of honour for all
the Emirs and Grandees. The Wazir kissed hands and fared forth on his
way; while the Sultan and the Prince abode at home in all the solace
and the delight of life; and the Fisherman became the richest man of
his age, and his daughters wived with the Kings, until death came to
them. And yet, O King! this is not more wondrous than the story of


The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad.


Once upon a time there was a Porter in Baghdad, who was a bachelor and
who would remain unmarried. It came to pass on a certain day, as he
stood about the street leaning idly upon his crate, behold, there stood
before him an honourable woman in a mantilla of Mosul[FN#138] silk,
broidered with gold and bordered with brocade; her walking shoes were
also purfled with gold and her hair floated in long plaits. She raised
her face veil[FN#139] and, showing two black eyes fringed with jetty
lashes, whose glances were soft and languishing and whose perfect
beauty was ever blandishing, she accosted the Porter and said in the
suavest tones and choicest language, "Take up thy crate and follow me."
The Porter was so dazzled he could hardly believe that he heard her
aright, but he shouldered his basket in hot haste saying in himself, "O
day of good luck! O day of Allah's grace!" and walked after her till
she stopped at the door of a house. There she rapped, and presently
came out to her an old man, a Nazarene, to whom she gave a gold piece,
receiving from him in return what she required of strained wine clear
as olive oil; and she set it safely in the hamper, saying "Lift and
follow." Quoth the Porter, "This, by Allah, is indeed an auspicious
day, a day propitious for the granting of all a man wisheth." He again
hoisted up the crate and followed her; till she stopped at a
fruiterer's shop and bought from him Shami[FN#140] apples and Osmani
quinces and Omani[FN#141] peaches, and cucumbers of Nile growth, and
Egyptian limes and Sultani oranges and citrons; besides Aleppine
jasmine, scented myrtle berries, Damascene nenuphars, flower of
privet[FN#142] and camomile, blood red anemones, violets, and
pomegranate bloom, eglantine and narcissus, and set the whole in the
Porter's crate, saying, "Up with it." So he lifted and followed her
till she stopped at a butcher's booth and said, "Cut me off ten pounds
of mutton." She paid him his price and he wrapped it in a banana leaf,
whereupon she laid it in the crate and said "Hoist, O Porter." He
hoisted accordingly, and followed her as she walked on till she stopped
at a grocer's, where she bought dry fruits and pistachio kernels,
Tihamah raisins, shelled almonds and all wanted for dessert, and said
to the Porter, "Lift and follow me." So he up with his hamper and after
her till she stayed at the confectioner's, and she bought an earthen
platter, and piled it with all kinds of sweetmeats in his shop, open
worked tarts and fritters scented with musk and "soap cakes," and lemon
loaves and melon preserves,[FN#143] and "Zaynab's combs," and "ladies'
fingers," and "Kazi's tit-bits" and goodies of every description; and
placed the platter in the Porter's crate. Thereupon quoth he (being a
merry man), "Thou shouldest have told me, and I would have brought with
me a pony or a she camel to carry all this market stuff." She smiled
and gave him a little cuff on the nape saying, "Step out and exceed not
in words for (Allah willing!) thy wage will not be wanting." Then she
stopped at a perfumer's and took from him ten sorts of waters, rose
scented with musk, orange-flower, water-lily, willow-flower, violet and
five others; and she also bought two loaves of sugar, a bottle for
perfume spraying, a lump of male incense, aloe-wood, ambergris and
musk, with candles of Alexandria wax; and she put the whole into the
basket, saying, "Up with thy crate and after me." He did so and
followed until she stood before the greengrocer's, of whom she bought
pickled safflower and olives, in brine and in oil; with tarragon and
cream cheese and hard Syrian cheese; and she stowed them away in the
crate saying to the Porter, "Take up thy basket and follow me." He did
so and went after her till she came to a fair mansion fronted by a
spacious court, a tall, fine place to which columns gave strength and
grace: and the gate thereof had two leaves of ebony inlaid with plates
of red gold. The lady stopped at the door and, turning her face veil
sideways, knocked softly with her knuckles whilst the Porter stood
behind her, thinking of naught save her beauty and loveliness.
Presently the door swung back and both leaves were opened, whereupon he
looked to see who had opened it; and behold, it was a lady of tall
figure, some five feet high; a model of beauty and loveliness,
brilliance and symmetry and perfect grace. Her forehead was flower
white; her cheeks like the anemone ruddy bright; her eyes were those of
the wild heifer or the gazelle, with eyebrows like the crescent moon
which ends Sha'aban and begins Ramazan;[FN#144] her mouth was the ring
of Sulayman,[FN#145] her lips coral red, and her teeth like a line of
strung pearls or of camomile petals. Her throat recalled the
antelope's, and her breasts, like two pomegranates of even size, stood
at bay as it were,[FN#146] her body rose and fell in waves below her
dress like the rolls of a piece of brocade, and her navel[FN#147] would
hold an ounce of benzoin ointment. In fine she was like her of whom the
poet said:—

On Sun and Moon of palace cast thy sight * Enjoy her flower like face,
her fragrant light:
Thine eyes shall never see in hair so black * Beauty encase a brow so
purely white:
The ruddy rosy cheek proclaims her claim * Though fail her name whose
beauties we indite:
As sways her gait I smile at hips so big * And weep to see the waist
they bear so slight.


When the Porter looked upon her his wits were waylaid, and his senses
were stormed so that his crate went nigh to fall from his head, and he
said to himself, "Never have I in my life seen a day more blessed than
this day!" Then quoth the lady portress to the lady cateress, "Come in
from the gate and relieve this poor man of his load." So the
provisioner went in followed by the portress and the Porter and went on
till they reached a spacious ground floor hall,[FN#148] built with
admirable skill and beautified with all manner colours and carvings;
with upper balconies and groined arches and galleries and cupboards and
recesses whose curtains hung before them. In the midst stood a great
basin full of water surrounding a fine fountain, and at the upper end
on the raised dais was a couch of juniper wood set with gems and
pearls, with a canopy like mosquito curtains of red satin silk looped
up with pearls as big as filberts and bigger. Thereupon sat a lady
bright of blee, with brow beaming brilliancy, the dream of philosophy,
whose eyes were fraught with Babel's gramarye[FN#149] and her eye brows
were arched as for archery; her breath breathed ambergris and perfumery
and her lips were sugar to taste and carnelian to see. Her stature was
straight as the letter I[FN#150] and her face shamed the noon sun's
radiancy; and she was even as a galaxy, or a dome with golden marquetry
or a bride displayed in choicest finery or a noble maid of
Araby.[FN#151] Right well of her sang the bard when he said:—

Her smiles twin rows of pearls display * Chamomile-buds or rimey spray
Her tresses stray as night let down * And shames her light the dawn o'
day.


[FN#152]The third lady rising from the couch stepped forward with grace
ful swaying gait till she reached the middle of the saloon, when she
said to her sisters, "Why stand ye here? take it down from this poor
man's head!" Then the cateress went and stood before him, and the
portress behind him while the third helped them, and they lifted the
load from the Porter's head; and, emptying it of all that was therein,
set everything in its place. Lastly they gave him two gold pieces,
saying, "Wend thy ways, O Porter." But he went not, for he stood
looking at the ladies and admiring what uncommon beauty was theirs, and
their pleasant manners and kindly dispositions (never had he seen
goodlier); and he gazed wistfully at that good store of wines and sweet
scented flowers and fruits and other matters. Also he marvelled with
exceeding marvel, especially to see no man in the place and delayed his
going; whereupon quoth the eldest lady, "What aileth thee that goest
not; haply thy wage be too little?" And, turning to her sister the
cateress, she said, "Give him another diner!" But the Porter answered,
"By Allah, my lady, it is not for the wage; my hire is never more than
two dirhams; but in very sooth my heart and my soul are taken up with
you and your condition. I wonder to see you single with ne'er a man
about you and not a soul to bear you company; and well you wot that the
minaret toppleth o'er unless it stand upon four, and you want this same
fourth; and women's pleasure without man is short of measure, even as
the poet said:—

Seest not we want for joy four things all told * The harp and lute, the
flute and flageolet;
And be they companied with scents four fold * Rose, myrtle, anemone and
violet
Nor please all eight an four thou wouldst withhold * Good wine and
youth and gold and pretty pet.


You be three and want a fourth who shall be a person of good sense and
prudence; smart witted, and one apt to keep careful counsel." His words
pleased and amused them much; and they laughed at him and said, "And
who is to assure us of that? We are maidens and we fear to entrust our
secret where it may not be kept, for we have read in a certain
chronicle the lines of one Ibn al-Sumam:—

Hold fast thy secret and to none unfold * Lost is a secret when that
secret's told
An fail thy breast thy secret to conceal * How canst thou hope
another's breast shall hold?


And Abu Nowás[FN#153] said well on the same subject:—

Who trusteth secret to another's hand * Upon his brow deserveth burn of
brand!"


When the Porter heard their words he rejoined, "By your lives! I am a
man of sense and a discreet, who hath read books and perused
chronicles; I reveal the fair and conceal the foul and I act as the
poet adviseth:—

None but the good a secret keep * And good men keep it unrevealed:
It is to me a well shut house * With keyless locks and door
ensealed"[FN#154]


When the maidens heard his verse and its poetical application addressed
to them they said, "Thou knowest that we have laid out all our monies
on this place. Now say, hast thou aught to offer us in return for
entertainment? For surely we will not suffer thee to sit in our company
and be our cup companion, and gaze upon our faces so fair and so rare
without paying a round sum.[FN#155] Wottest thou not the saying:—

Sans hope of gain
Love's not worth a grain?"


Whereto the lady portress added, "If thou bring anything thou art a
something; if no thing, be off with thee, thou art a nothing;" but the
procuratrix interposed, saying, "Nay, O my sisters, leave teasing him
for by Allah he hath not failed us this day, and had he been other he
never had kept patience with me, so whatever be his shot and scot I
will take it upon myself." The Porter, over joyed, kissed the ground
before her and thanked her saying, "By Allah, these monies are the
first fruits this day hath given me." Hearing this they said, "Sit thee
down and welcome to thee," and the eldest lady added, "By Allah, we may
not suffer thee to join us save on one condition, and this it is, that
no questions be asked as to what concerneth thee not, and frowardness
shall be soundly flogged." Answered the Porter, "I agree to this, O my
lady, on my head and my eyes be it! Lookye, I am dumb, I have no
tongue. Then arose the provisioneress and tightening her girdle set the
table by the fountain and put the flowers and sweet herbs in their
jars, and strained the wine and ranged the flasks in row and made ready
every requisite. Then sat she down, she and her sisters, placing amidst
them the Porter who kept deeming himself in a dream; and she took up
the wine flagon, and poured out the first cup and drank it off, and
likewise a second and a third.[FN#156] After this she filled a fourth
cup which she handed to one of her sisters; and, lastly, she crowned a
goblet and passed it to the Porter, saying:—

"Drink the dear draught, drink free and fain * What healeth every grief
and pain."


He took the cup in his hand and, louting low, returned his best thanks
and improvised:—

“Drain not the bowl save with a trusty friend * A man of worth whose
good old blood all know:
For wine, like wind, sucks sweetness from the sweet * And stinks when
over stench it haply blow:”


Adding:—

Drain not the bowl; save from dear hand like thine * The cup recall thy
gifts; thou, gifts of wine."


After repeating this couplet he kissed their hands and drank and was
drunk and sat swaying from side to side and pursued:—

"All drinks wherein is blood the Law unclean * Doth hold save one, the
blood shed of the vine:
Fill! fill! take all my wealth bequeathed or won * Thou fawn! a willing
ransom for those eyne."


Then the cateress crowned a cup and gave it to the portress, who took
it from her hand and thanked her and drank. Thereupon she poured again
and passed to the eldest lady who sat on the couch, and filled yet
another and handed it to the Porter. He kissed the ground before them;
and, after drinking and thanking them, he again began to recite :

"Here! Here! by Allah, here! * Cups of the sweet, the dear'
Fill me a brimming bowl * The Fount o' Life I speer


Then the Porter stood up before the mistress of the house and said, "O
lady, I am thy slave, thy Mameluke, thy white thrall, thy very
bondsman;" and he began reciting:—

"A slave of slaves there standeth at thy door * Lauding thy generous
boons and gifts galore
Beauty! may he come in awhile to 'joy * Thy charms? for Love and I part
nevermore!"


She said to him, "Drink; and health and happiness attend thy drink." So
he took the cup and kissed her hand and recited these lines in sing
song:

"I gave her brave old wine that like her cheeks * Blushed red or flame
from furnace flaring up:
She bussed the brim and said with many a smile * How durst thou deal
folk's cheek for folk to sup?
"Drink!" (said I) "these are tears of mine whose tinct * Is heart blood
sighs have boiled in the cup."


She answered him in the following couplet:—

"An tears of blood for me, friend, thou hast shed * Suffer me sup them,
by thy head and eyes!"


Then the lady took the cup, and drank it off to her sisters' health,
and they ceased not drinking (the Porter being in the midst of them),
and dancing and laughing and reciting verses and singing ballads and
ritornellos. All this time the Porter was carrying on with them,
kissing, toying, biting, handling, groping, fingering; whilst one
thrust a dainty morsel in his mouth, and another slapped him; and this
cuffed his cheeks, and that threw sweet flowers at him; and he was in
the very paradise of pleasure, as though he were sitting in the seventh
sphere among the Houris[FN#157] of Heaven. They ceased not doing after
this fashion until the wine played tricks in their heads and worsted
their wits; and, when the drink got the better of them, the portress
stood up and doffed her clothes till she was mother naked. However, she
let down her hair about her body by way of shift, and throwing herself
into the basin disported herself and dived like a duck and swam up and
down, and took water in her mouth, and spurted it all over the Porter,
and washed her limbs, and between her breasts, and inside her thighs
and all around her navel. Then she came up out of the cistern and
throwing herself on the Porter's lap said, "O my lord, O my love, what
callest thou this article?" pointing to her slit, her solution of
continuity. "I call that thy cleft," quoth the Porter, and she
rejoined, Wah! wah, art thou not ashamed to use such a word?" and she
caught him by the collar and soundly cuffed him. Said he again, Thy
womb, thy vulva;" and she struck him a second slap crying, "O fie, O
fie, this is another ugly word; is there no shame in thee?" Quoth he,
"Thy coynte;" and she cried, O thou! art wholly destitute of modesty?"
and thumped him and bashed him. Then cried the Porter, "Thy
clitoris,"[FN#158] whereat the eldest lady came down upon him with a
yet sorer beating, and said, "No;" and he said, " 'Tis so," and the
Porter went on calling the same commodity by sundry other names, but
whatever he said they beat him more and more till his neck ached and
swelled with the blows he had gotten; and on this wise they made him a
butt and a laughing stock. At last he turned upon them asking, And what
do you women call this article?" Whereto the damsel made answer, "The
basil of the bridges."[FN#159] Cried the Porter, "Thank Allah for my
safety: aid me and be thou propitious, O basil of the bridges!" They
passed round the cup and tossed off the bowl again, when the second
lady stood up; and, stripping off all her clothes, cast herself into
the cistern and did as the first had done; then she came out of the
water and throwing her naked form on the Porter's lap pointed to her
machine and said, "O light of mine eyes, do tell me what is the name of
this concern?" He replied as before, "Thy slit;" and she rejoined,
"Hath such term no shame for thee?" and cuffed him and buffeted him
till the saloon rang with the blows. Then quoth she, "O fie! O fie! how
canst thou say this without blushing?" He suggested, "The basil of the
bridges;" but she would not have it and she said, "No! no!" and struck
him and slapped him on the back of the neck. Then he began calling out
all the names he knew, "Thy slit, thy womb, thy coynte, thy clitoris;"
and the girls kept on saying, "No! no!" So he said, "I stick to the
basil of the bridges;" and all the three laughed till they fell on
their backs and laid slaps on his neck and said, "No! no! that's not
its proper name." Thereupon he cried, "O my sisters, what is its name?"
and they replied, "What sayest thou to the husked sesame seed?" Then
the cateress donned her clothes and they fell again to carousing, but
the Porter kept moaning, "Oh! and Oh!" for his neck and shoulders, and
the cup passed merrily round and round again for a full hour. After
that time the eldest and handsomest lady stood up and stripped off her
garments, whereupon the Porter took his neck in hand, and rubbed and
shampoo'd it, saying, "My neck and shoulders are on the way of
Allah!"[FN#160] Then she threw herself into the basin, and swam and
dived, sported and washed; and the Porter looked at her naked figure as
though she had been a slice of the moon[FN#161] and at her face with
the sheen of Luna when at full, or like the dawn when it brighteneth,
and he noted her noble stature and shape, and those glorious forms that
quivered as she went; for she was naked as the Lord made her. Then he
cried "Alack! Alack!"and began to address her, versifying in these
couplets:—

"If I liken thy shape to the bough when green * My likeness errs and I
sore mistake it;
For the bough is fairest when clad the most * And thou art fairest when
mother naked."


When the lady heard his verses she came up out of the basin and,
seating herself upon his lap and knees, pointed to her genitory and
said, "O my lordling, what be the name of this?" Quoth he, "The basil
of the bridges;" but she said, "Bah, bah!" Quoth he, "The husked
sesame;" quoth she, "Pooh, pooh!" Then said he, "Thy womb;" and she
cried, "Fie, Fie! art thou not ashamed of thyself?" and cuffed him on
the nape of the neck. And whatever name he gave declaring " 'Tis so,"
she beat him and cried "No! no!" till at last he said, "O my sisters,
and what is its name?" She replied, "It is entitled the Khan[FN#162] of
Abu Mansur;" whereupon the Porter replied, "Ha! ha! O Allah be praised
for safe deliverance! O Khan of Abu Mansur!" Then she came forth and
dressed and the cup went round a full hour. At last the Porter rose up,
and stripping off all his clothes, jumped into the tank and swam about
and washed under his bearded chin and armpits, even as they had done.
Then he came out and threw himself into the first lady's lap and rested
his arms upon the lap of the portress, and reposed his legs in the lap
of the cateress and pointed to his prickle[FN#163] and said, "O my
mistresses, what is the name of this article?" All laughed at his words
till they fell on their backs, and one said, "Thy pintle!" But he
replied, "No!" and gave each one of them a bite by way of forfeit. Then
said they, "Thy pizzle!" but he cried "No," and gave each of them a
hug; And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

When it was the Tenth Night,


Quoth her sister Dunyazad, "Finish for us thy story;" and she answered,
"With joy and goodly gree." It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
the damsels stinted not saying to the Porter "Thy prickle, thy pintle,
thy pizzle," and he ceased not kissing and biting and hugging until his
heart was satisfied, and they laughed on till they could no more. At
last one said, "O our brother, what, then, is it called?" Quoth he,
"Know ye not?" Quoth they, "No!" "Its veritable name," said he, "is
mule Burst all, which browseth on the basil of the bridges, and
muncheth the husked sesame, and nighteth in the Khan of Abu Mansur."
Then laughed they till they fell on their backs, and returned to their
carousel, and ceased not to be after this fashion till night began to
fall. Thereupon said they to the Porter, “Bismillah,[FN#164] O our
master, up and on with those sorry old shoes of thine and turn thy face
and show us the breadth of thy shoulders!” Said he, "By Allah, to part
with my soul would be easier for me than departing from you: come let
us join night to day, and tomorrow morning we will each wend our own
way." "My life on you," said the procuratrix, "suffer him to tarry with
us, that we may laugh at him: we may live out our lives and never meet
with his like, for surely he is a right merry rogue and a
witty."[FN#165] So they said, "Thou must not remain with us this night
save on condition that thou submit to our commands, and that whatso
thou seest, thou ask no questions there anent, nor enquire of its
cause." "All right," rejoined he, and they said, "Go read the writing
over the door." So he rose and went to the entrance and there found
written in letters of gold wash; WHOSO SPEAKETH OF WHAT CONCERNETH HIM
NOT, SHALL HEAR WHAT PLEASETH HIM NOT![FN#166] The Porter said, Be ye
witnesses against me that I will not speak on whatso concerneth me
not." Then the cateress arose, and set food before them and they ate;
after which they changed their drinking-place for another, and she
lighted the lamps and candles and burned ambergris and aloes wood, and
set on fresh fruit and the wine service, when they fell to carousing
and talking of their lovers. And they ceased not to eat and drink and
chat, nibbling dry fruits and laughing and playing tricks for the space
of a full hour when lo! a knock was heard at the gate. The knocking in
no wise disturbed the seance, but one of them rose and went to see what
it was and presently returned, saying, "Truly our pleasure for this
night is to be perfect." "How is that?" asked they; and she answered,
"At the gate be three Persian Kalandars[FN#167] with their beards and
heads and eyebrows shaven; and all three blind of the left eye—which is
surely a strange chance. They are foreigners from Roum-land with the
mark of travel plain upon them; they have just entered Baghdad, this
being their first visit to our city; and the cause of their knocking at
our door is simply because they cannot find a lodging. Indeed one of
them said to me:—Haply the owner of this mansion will let us have the
key of his stable or some old out house wherein we may pass this night;
for evening had surprised them and, being strangers in the land, they
knew none who would give them shelter. And, O my sisters, each of them
is a figure o' fun after his own fashion; and if we let them in we
shall have matter to make sport of." She gave not over persuading them
till they said to her, "Let them in, and make thou the usual condition
with them that they speak not of what concerneth them not, lest they
hear what pleaseth them not." So she rejoiced and going to the door
presently returned with the three monoculars whose beards and
mustachios were clean shaven.[FN#168] They salam'd and stood afar off
by way of respect; but the three ladies rose up to them and welcomed
them and wished them joy of their safe arrival and made them sit down.
The Kalandars looked at the room and saw that it was a pleasant place,
clean swept and garnished with flowers; and the lamps were burning and
the smoke of perfumes was spireing in air; and beside the dessert and
fruits and wine, there were three fair girls who might be maidens; so
they exclaimed with one voice, "By Allah, 'tis good!" Then they turned
to the Porter and saw that he was a merry faced wight, albeit he was by
no means sober and was sore after his slappings. So they thought that
he was one of themselves and said, "A mendicant like us! whether Arab
or foreigner."[FN#169] But when the Porter heard these words, he rose
up, and fixing his eyes fiercely upon them, said, "Sit ye here without
exceeding in talk! Have you not read what is writ over the door? surely
it befitteth not fellows who come to us like paupers to wag your
tongues at us." "We crave thy pardon, O Fakír,"[FN#170] rejoined they,
"and our heads are between thy hands." The ladies laughed consumedly at
the squabble; and, making peace between the Kalandars and the Porter,
seated the new guests before meat and they ate. Then they sat together,
and the portress served them with drink; and, as the cup went round
merrily, quoth the Porter to the askers, "And you, O brothers mine,
have ye no story or rare adventure to amuse us withal?" Now the warmth
of wine having mounted to their heads they called for musical
instruments; and the portress brought them a tambourine of Mosul, and a
lute of Irák, and a Persian harp; and each mendicant took one and tuned
it; this the tambourine and those the lute and the harp, and struck up
a merry tune while the ladies sang so lustily that there was a great
noise.[FN#171] And whilst they were carrying on, behold, some one
knocked at the gate, and the portress went to see what was the matter
there. Now the cause of that knocking, O King (quoth Shahrazad) was
this, the Caliph, Harun al-Rashid, had gone forth from the palace, as
was his wont now and then, to solace himself in the city that night,
and to see and hear what new thing was stirring; he was in merchant's
gear, and he was attended by Ja'afar, his Wazir, and by Masrur his
Sworder of Vengeance.[FN#172] As they walked about the city, their way
led them towards the house of the three ladies; where they heard the
loud noise of musical instruments and singing and merriment; so quoth
the Caliph to Ja'afar, "I long to enter this house and hear those songs
and see who sing them." Quoth Ja'afar, "O Prince of the Faithful; these
folk are surely drunken with wine, and I fear some mischief betide us
if we get amongst them." "There is no help but that I go in there,"
replied the Caliph, "and I desire thee to contrive some pretext for our
appearing among them." Ja'afar replied, "I hear and I obey;"[FN#173]
and knocked at the door, whereupon the portress came out and opened.
Then Ja'afar came forward and kissing the ground before her said, "O my
lady, we be merchants from Tiberias town: we arrived at Baghdad ten
days ago; and, alighting at the merchants' caravanserai, we sold all
our merchandise. Now a certain trader invited us to an entertainment
this night; so we went to his house and he set food before us and we
ate: then we sat at wine and wassail with him for an hour or so when he
gave us leave to depart; and we went out from him in the shadow of the
night and, being strangers, we could not find our way back to our Khan.
So haply of your kindness and courtesy you will suffer us to tarry with
you this night, and Heaven will reward you!"[FN#174] The portress
looked upon them and seeing them dressed like merchants and men of
grave looks and solid, she returned to her sisters and repeated to them
Ja'afar's story; and they took compassion upon the strangers and said
to her, "Let them enter." She opened the door to them, when said they
to her, "Have we thy leave to come in?" "Come in," quoth she; and the
Caliph entered followed by Ja'afar and Masrur; and when the girls saw
them they stood up to them in respect and made them sit down and looked
to their wants, saying, "Welcome, and well come and good cheer to the
guests, but with one condition!" "What is that?" asked they, and one of
the ladies answered, "Speak not of what concerneth you not, lest ye
hear what pleaseth you not." "Even so," said they; and sat down to
their wine and drank deep. Presently the Caliph looked on the three
Kalandars and, seeing them each and every blind of the left eye,
wondered at the sight; then he gazed upon the girls and he was startled
and he marvelled with exceeding marvel at their beauty and loveliness.
They continued to carouse and to converse and said to the Caliph,
"Drink!" but he replied, "I am vowed to Pilgrimage;"[FN#175] and drew
back from the wine. Thereupon the portress rose and spreading before
him a table cloth worked with gold, set thereon a porcelain bowl into
which she poured willow flower water with a lump of snow and a spoonful
of sugar candy. The Caliph thanked her and said in himself,"By Allah, I
will recompense her tomorrow for the kind deed she hath done." The
others again addressed themselves to conversing and carousing; and,
when the wine gat the better of them, the eldest lady who ruled the
house rose and making obeisance to them took the cateress by the hand,
and said, "Rise, O my sister and let us do what is our devoir." Both
answered "Even so!" Then the portress stood up and proceeded to remove
the table service and the remnants of the banquet; and renewed the
pastiles and cleared the middle of the saloon. Then she made the
Kalandars sit upon a sofa at the side of the estrade, and seated the
Caliph and Ja'afar and Masrur on the other side of the saloon; after
which she called the Porter, and said, "How scanty is thy courtesy! now
thou art no stranger; nay, thou art one of the household." So he stood
up and, tightening his waist cloth, asked, "What would ye I do?" and
she answered, "Stand in thy place." Then the procuratrix rose and set
in the midst of the saloon a low chair and, opening a closet, cried to
the Porter, "Come help me." So he went to help her and saw two black
bitches with chains round their necks; and she said to him, "Take hold
of them;" and he took them and led them into the middle of the saloon.
Then the lady of the house arose and tucked up her sleeves above her
wrists and, seizing a scourge, said to the Porter, "Bring forward one
of the bitches." He brought her forward, dragging her by the chain,
while the bitch wept, and shook her head at the lady who, however, came
down upon her with blows on the sconce; and the bitch howled and the
lady ceased not beating her till her forearm failed her. Then, casting
the scourge from her hand, she pressed the bitch to her bosom and,
wiping away her tears with her hands, kissed her head. Then she said to
the Porter, "Take her away and bring the second;" and, when he brought
her, she did with her as she had done with the first. Now the heart of
the Caliph, was touched at these cruel doings; his chest straitened and
he lost all patience in his desire to know why the two bitches were so
beaten. He threw a wink at Ja'afar wishing him to ask, but; the
Minister turning towards him said by signs, "Be silent!" Then quoth the
portress to the mistress of the house, "O my lady, arise and go to thy
place that I in turn may do my devoir."[FN#176] She answered, "Even
so"; and, taking her seat upon the couch of juniper wood, pargetted
with gold and silver, said to the portress and cateress, "Now do ye
what ye have to do." Thereupon the portress sat upon a low seat by the
couch side; but the procuratrix, entering a closet, brought out of it a
bag of satin with green fringes and two tassels of gold. She stood up
before the lady of the house and shaking the bag drew out from it a
lute which she tuned by tightening its pegs; and when it was in perfect
order, she began to sing these quatrains:—

"Ye are the wish, the aim of me *And when, O Love, thy sight I
see[FN#177]
The heavenly mansion openeth;[FN#178] * But Hell I see when lost thy
sight.
From thee comes madness; nor the less * Comes highest joy, comes
ecstasy:
Nor in my love for thee I fear * Or shame and blame, or hate and spite.
When Love was throned within my heart * I rent the veil of modesty;
And stints not Love to rend that veil * Garring disgrace on grace to
alight;
The robe of sickness then I donned * But rent to rags was secrecy:
Wherefore my love and longing heart * Proclaim your high supremest
might;
The tear drop railing adown my cheek * Telleth my tale of ignomy:
And all the hid was seen by all * And all my riddle ree'd aright.


Heal then my malady, for thou * Art malady and remedy!
But she whose cure is in thy hand * Shall ne'er be free of bane and
blight;
Burn me those eyne that radiance rain * Slay me the swords of phantasy;
How many hath the sword of Love * Laid low, their high degree despite?
Yet will I never cease to pine * Nor to oblivion will I flee.
Love is my health, my faith, my joy * Public and private, wrong or
right.
O happy eyes that sight thy charms * That gaze upon thee at their gree!
Yea, of my purest wish and will * The slave of Love I'll aye be hight."


When the damsel heard this elegy in quatrains she cried out "Alas!
Alas!" and rent her raiment, and fell to the ground fainting; and the
Caliph saw scars of the palm rod[FN#179] on her back and welts of the
whip; and marvelled with exceeding wonder. Then the portress arose and
sprinkled water on her and brought her a fresh and very fine dress and
put it on her. But when the company beheld these doings their minds
were troubled, for they had no inkling of the case nor knew the story
thereof; so the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "Didst thou not see the scars
upon the damsel's body? I cannot keep silence or be at rest till I
learn the truth of her condition and the story of this other maiden and
the secret of the two black bitches." But Ja'afar answered, "O our
lord, they made it a condition with us that we speak not of what
concerneth us not, lest we come to hear what pleaseth us not." Then
said the portress "By Allah, O my sister, come to me and complete this
service for me." Replied the procuratrix, "With joy and goodly gree;"
so she took the lute; and leaned it against her breasts and swept the
strings with her finger tips, and began singing:—

"Give back mine eyes their sleep long ravished * And say me whither be
my reason fled:
I learnt that lending to thy love a place * Sleep to mine eyelids
mortal foe was made.
They said, "We held thee righteous, who waylaid * Thy soul?" "Go ask
his glorious eyes," I said.
I pardon all my blood he pleased to spill * Owning his troubles drove
him blood to shed.
On my mind's mirror sun like sheen he cast * Whose keen reflection fire
in vitals bred
Waters of Life let Allah waste at will * Suffice my wage those lips of
dewy red:
An thou address my love thou'lt find a cause * For plaint and tears or
ruth or lustihed.
In water pure his form shall greet your eyne * When fails the bowl nor
need ye drink of wine.[FN#180]"


Then she quoted from the same ode:—

"I drank, but the draught of his glance, not wine, * And his swaying
gait swayed to sleep these eyne:
'Twas not grape juice grips me but grasp of Past * 'Twas not bowl
o'erbowled me but gifts divine:
His coiling curl-lets my soul ennetted * And his cruel will all my wits
outwitted.[FN#181]"


After a pause she resumed:—

"If we 'plain of absence what shall we say? * Or if pain afflict us
where wend our way?
An I hire a truchman[FN#182] to tell my tale * The lover's plaint is
not told for pay:
If I put on patience, a lover's life * After loss of love will not last
a day:
Naught is left me now but regret, repine * And tears flooding cheeks
for ever and aye:
O thou who the babes of these eyes[FN#183] hast fled * Thou art homed
in heart that shall never stray
Would heaven I wot hast thou kept our pact * Long as stream shall flow,
to have firmest fay?
Or hast forgotten the weeping slave * Whom groans afflict and whom
griefs waylay?
Ah, when severance ends and we side by side * Couch, I'll blame thy
rigours and chide thy pride!"


Now when the portress heard her second ode she shrieked aloud and said,
"By Allah! 'tis right good!"; and laying hands on her garments tore
them, as she did the first time, and fell to the ground fainting.
Thereupon the procuratrix rose end brought her a second change of
clothes after she had sprinkled water on her. She recovered and sat
upright and said to her sister the cateress, "Onwards, and help me in
my duty, for there remains but this one song." So the provisioneress
again brought out the lute and began to sing these verses:—

"How long shall last, how long this rigour rife of woe * May not
suffice thee all these tears thou seest flow?
Our parting thus with purpose fell thou dost prolong * Is't not enough
to glad the heart of envious foe?
Were but this lying world once true to lover heart * He had not watched
the weary night in tears of woe:
Oh pity me whom overwhelmed thy cruel will * My lord, my king, 'tis
time some ruth to me thou show:
To whom reveal my wrongs, O thou who murdered me? * Sad, who of broken
troth the pangs must undergo!
Increase wild love for thee and phrenzy hour by hour * And days of
exile minute by so long, so slow;
O Moslems, claim vendetta[FN#184] for this slave of Love * Whose sleep
Love ever wastes, whose patience Love lays low:
Doth law of Love allow thee, O my wish! to lie * Lapt in another's arms
and unto me cry Go!?
Yet in thy presence, say, what joys shall I enjoy * When he I love but
works my love to overthrow?"


When the portress heard the third song she cried aloud; and, laying
hands on her garments, rent them down to the very skirt and fell to the
ground fainting a third time, again showing the scars of the scourge.
Then said the three Kalandars, "Would Heaven we had never entered this
house, but had rather nighted on the mounds and heaps outside the city!
for verily our visit hath been troubled by sights which cut to the
heart." The Caliph turned to them and asked, "Why so?" and they made
answer, "Our minds are sore troubled by this matter." Quoth the Caliph,
"Are ye not of the household?" and quoth they, "No; nor indeed did we
ever set eyes on the place till within this hour." Hereat the Caliph
marvelled and rejoined, "This man who sitteth by you, would he not know
the secret of the matter?" and so saying he winked and made signs at
the Porter. So they questioned the man but he replied, "By the All
might of Allah, in love all are alike![FN#185] I am the growth of
Baghdad, yet never in my born days did I darken these doors till to day
and my companying with them was a curious matter." "By Allah," they
rejoined, "we took thee for one of them and now we see thou art one
like ourselves." Then said the Caliph, "We be seven men, and they only
three women without even a fourth to help them; so let us question them
of their case; and, if they answer us not, fain we will be answered by
force." All of them agreed to this except Ja'afar who said,[FN#186]
"This is not my recking; let them be; for we are their guests and, as
ye know, they made a compact and condition with us which we accepted
and promised to keep: wherefore it is better that we be silent
concerning this matter; and, as but little of the night remaineth, let
each and every of us gang his own gait." Then he winked at the Caliph
and whispered to him, "There is but one hour of darkness left and I can
bring them before thee to morrow, when thou canst freely question them
all concerning their story." But the Caliph raised his head haughtily
and cried out at him in wrath, saying, "I have no patience left for my
longing to hear of them: let the Kalandars question them forthright."
Quoth Ja'afar, "This is not my rede." Then words ran high and talk
answered talk, and they disputed as to who should first put the
question, but at last all fixed upon the Porter. And as the jingle
increased the house mistress could not but notice it and asked them, "O
ye folk! on what matter are ye talking so loudly?" Then the Porter
stood up respectfully before her and said, "O my lady, this company
earnestly desire that thou acquaint them with the story of the two
bitches and what maketh thee punish them so cruelly; and then thou
fallest to weeping over them and kissing them; and lastly they want to
hear the tale of thy sister and why she hath been bastinado'd with palm
sticks like a man. These are the questions they charge me to put, and
peace be with thee."[FN#187] Thereupon quoth she who was the lady of
the house to the guests, "Is this true that he saith on your part?" and
all replied, "Yes!" save Ja'afar who kept silence. When she heard these
words she cried, "By Allah, ye have wronged us, O our guests. with
grievous wronging; for when you came before us we made compact and
condition with you, that whoso should speak of what concerneth him not
should hear what pleaseth him not. Sufficeth ye not that we took you
into our house and fed you with our best food? But the fault is not so
much yours as hers who let you in." Then she tucked up her sleeves from
her wrists and struck the floor thrice with her hand crying, "Come ye
quickly;" and lo! a closet door opened and out of it came seven negro
slaves with drawn swords in hand to whom she said, "Pinion me those
praters' elbows and bind them each to each." They did her bidding and
asked her, "O veiled and virtuous! is it thy high command that we
strike off their heads?"; but she answered, "Leave them awhile that I
question them of their condition, before their necks feel the sword."
"By Allah, O my lady!" cried the Porter, "slay me not for other's sin;
all these men offended and deserve the penalty of crime save myself.
Now by Allah, our night had been charming had we escaped the
mortification of those monocular Kalandars whose entrance into a
populous city would convert it into a howling wilderness." Then he
repeated these verses :

"How fair is ruth the strong man deigns not smother! * And fairest fair
when shown to weakest brother:
By Love's own holy tie between us twain, * Let one not suffer for the
sin of other."


When the Porter ended his verse the lady laughed. And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

When It was the Eleventh Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady, after
laughing at the Porter despite her wrath, came up to the party and
spake thus, "Tell me who ye be, for ye have but an hour of life; and
were ye not men of rank and, perhaps, notables of your tribes, you had
not been so froward and I had hastened your doom." Then said the
Caliph, "Woe to thee, O Ja'afar, tell her who we are lest we be slain
by mistake; and speak her fair before some horror befal us." "'Tis part
of thy deserts,"replied he; whereupon the Caliph cried out at him
saying, "There is a time for witty words and there is a time for
serious work." Then the lady accosted the three Kalandars and asked
them, "Are ye brothers?"; when they answered, "No, by Allah, we be
naught but Fakirs and foreigners." Then quoth she to one among them,
"Wast thou born blind of one eye?"; and quoth he, "No, by Allah, 'twas
a marvellous matter and a wondrous mischance which caused my eye to be
torn out, and mine is a tale which, if it were written upon the eye
corners with needle gravers, were a warner to whoso would be
warned."[FN#188] She questioned the second and third Kalandar; but all
replied like the first, "By Allah, O our mistress, each one of us
cometh from a different country, and we are all three the sons of
Kings, sovereign Princes ruling over suzerains and capital cities."
Thereupon she turned towards them and said, "Let each and every of you
tell me his tale in due order and explain the cause of his coming to
our place; and if his story please us let him stroke his head[FN#189]
and wend his way." The first to come forward was the Hammal, the
Porter, who said, "O my lady, I am a man and a porter. This dame, the
cateress, hired me to carry a load and took me first to the shop of a
vintner, then to the booth of a butcher; thence to the stall of a
fruiterer; thence to a grocer who also sold dry fruits; thence to a
confectioner and a perfumer cum druggist and from him to this place
where there happened to me with you what happened. Such is my story and
peace be on us all!" At this the lady laughed and said, "Rub thy head
and wend thy ways!"; but he cried, "By Allah, I will not stump it till
I hear the stories of my companions." Then came forward one of the
Monoculars and began to tell her


The First Kalandar’s Tale.


Know, O my lady, that the cause of my beard being shorn and my eye
being out torn was as follows. My father was a King and he had a
brother who was a King over another city; and it came to pass that I
and my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle, were both born on one and
the same day. And years and days rolled on; and, as we grew up, I used
to visit my uncle every now and then and to spend a certain number of
months with him. Now my cousin and I were sworn friends; for he ever
entreated me with exceeding kindness; he killed for me the fattest
sheep and strained the best of his wines, and we enjoyed long
conversing and carousing. One day when the wine had gotten the better
of us, the son of my uncle said to me, "O my cousin, I have a great
service to ask of thee; and I desire that thou stay me not in whatso I
desire to do!" And I replied, "With joy and goodly will." Then he made
me swear the most binding oaths and left me; but after a little while
he returned leading a lady veiled and richly apparelled with ornaments
worth a large sum of money. Presently he turned to me (the woman being
still behind him) and said, "Take this lady with thee and go before me
to such a burial ground" (describing it, so that I knew the place),
"and enter with her into such a sepulchre[FN#190] and there await my
coming." The oaths I swore to him made me keep silence and suffered me
not to oppose him; so I led the woman to the cemetery and both I and
she took our seats in the sepulchre; and hardly had we sat down when in
came my uncle's son, with a bowl of water, a bag of mortar and an adze
somewhat like a hoe. He went straight to the tomb in the midst of the
sepulchre and, breaking it open with the adze set the stones on one
side; then he fell to digging into the earth of the tomb till he came
upon a large iron plate, the size of a wicket door; and on raising it
there appeared below it a staircase vaulted and winding. Then he turned
to the lady and said to her, "Come now and take thy final choice!" She
at once went down by the staircase and disappeared; then quoth he to
me, "O son of my uncle, by way of completing thy kindness, when I shall
have descended into this place, restore the trap door to where it was,
and heap back the earth upon it as it lay before; and then of thy great
goodness mix this unslaked lime which is in the bag with this water
which is in the bowl and, after building up the stones, plaster the
outside so that none looking upon it shall say:—This is a new opening
in an old tomb. For a whole year have I worked at this place whereof
none knoweth but Allah, and this is the need I have of thee;" presently
adding, "May Allah never bereave thy friends of thee nor make them
desolate by thine absence, O son of my uncle, O my dear cousin!" And he
went down the stairs and disappeared for ever. When he was lost to
sight I replaced the iron plate and did all his bidding till the tomb
became as it was before and I worked almost unconsciously for my head
was heated with wine. Returning to the palace of my uncle, I was told
that he had gone forth a-sporting and hunting; so I slept that night
without seeing him; and, when the morning dawned, I remembered the
scenes of the past evening and what happened between me and my cousin;
I repented of having obeyed him when penitence was of no avail, I still
thought, however, that it was a dream. So I fell to asking for the son
of my uncle; but there was none to answer me concerning him; and I went
out to the grave-yard and the sepulchres, and sought for the tomb under
which he was, but could not find it; and I ceased not wandering about
from sepulchre to sepulchre, and tomb to tomb, all without success,
till night set in. So I returned to the city, yet I could neither eat
nor drink; my thoughts being engrossed with my cousin, for that I knew
not what was become of him; and I grieved with exceeding grief and
passed another sorrowful night, watching until the morning. Then went I
a second time to the cemetery, pondering over what the son of mine
uncle had done; and, sorely repenting my hearkening to him, went round
among all the tombs, but could not find the tomb I sought. I mourned
over the past, and remained in my mourning seven days, seeking the
place and ever missing the path. Then my torture of scruples[FN#191]
grew upon me till I well nigh went mad, and I found no way to dispel my
grief save travel and return to my father. So I set out and journeyed
homeward; but as I was entering my father's capital a crowd of rioters
sprang upon me and pinioned me.[FN#192] I wondered thereat with all
wonderment, seeing that I was the son of the Sultan, and these men were
my father's subjects and amongst them were some of my own slaves. A
great fear fell upon me, and I said to my soul,[FN#193] "Would heaven I
knew what hath happened to my father!" I questioned those that bound me
of the cause of their doing, but they returned me no answer. However,
after a while one of them said to me (and he had been a hired servant
of our house), "Fortune hath been false to thy father; his troops
betrayed him and the Wazir who slew him now reigneth in his stead and
we lay in wait to seize thee by the bidding of him." I was well nigh
distraught and felt ready to faint on hearing of my father's death;
when they carried me off and placed me in presence of the usurper. Now
between me and him there was an olden grudge, the cause of which was
this. I was fond of shooting with the stone bow,[FN#194] and it befel
one day as I was standing on the terrace roof of the palace, that a
bird lighted on the top of the Wazir's house when he happened to be
there. I shot at the bird and missed the mark; but I hit the Wazir's
eye and knocked it out as fate and fortune decreed. Even so saith the
poet:—

We tread the path where Fate hath led * The path Fate writ we fain must
tread:
And man in one land doomed to die * Death no where else shall do him
dead.


And on like wise saith another:—

Let Fortune have her wanton way * Take heart and all her words obey:
Nor joy nor mourn at anything * For all things pass and no things stay.


Now when I knocked out the Wazir's eye he could not say a single word,
for that my father was King of the city; but he hated me ever after and
dire was the grudge thus caused between us twain. So when I was set
before him hand bound and pinioned, he straightway gave orders for me
to be beheaded. I asked, "For what crime wilt thou put me to death?";
whereupon he answered, "What crime is greater than this?" pointing the
while to the place where his eye had been Quoth I, "This I did by
accident not of malice prepense;" and quoth he, “If thou didst it by
accident, I will do the like by thee with intention.”[FN#195] Then
cried he, "Bring him forward," and they brought me up to him, when he
thrust his finger into my left eye and gouged it out; whereupon I
became one eyed as ye see me. Then he bade bind me hand and foot, and
put me into a chest and said to the sworder, "Take charge of this
fellow, and go off with him to the waste lands about the city; then
draw thy scymitar and slay him, and leave him to feed the beasts and
birds." So the headsman fared forth with me and when he was in the
midst of the desert, he took me out of the chest (and I with both hands
pinioned and both feet fettered) and was about to bandage my eyes
before striking off my head. But I wept with exceeding weeping until I
made him weep with me and, looking at him I began to recite these
couplets:—

"I deemed you coat o' mail that should withstand * The foeman's shafts,
and you proved foeman's brand
I hoped your aidance in mine every chance * Though fail my left to aid
my dexter hand:
Aloof you stand and hear the railer's gibe * While rain their shafts on
me the giber-band:
But an ye will not guard me from my foes * Stand clear, and succour
neither these nor those!"


And I also quoted:—

"I deemed my brethren mail of strongest steel * And so they were—from
foes to fend my dart!
I deemed their arrows surest of their aim; * And so they were—when
aiming at my heart!"


When the headsman heard my lines (he had been sworder to my sire and he
owed me a debt of gratitude) he cried, "O my lord, what can I do, being
but a slave under orders?" presently adding, "Fly for thy life and
nevermore return to this land, or they will slay thee and slay me with
thee, even as the poet said:—

Take thy life and fly whenas evils threat; * Let the ruined house tell
its owner's fate:
New land for the old thou shalt seek and find * But to find new life
thou must not await.
Strange that men should sit in the stead of shame, * When Allah's world
is so wide and great!
And trust not other, in matters grave * Life itself must act for a life
beset:
Ne'er would prowl the lion with maned neck, * Did he reckon on aid or
of others reck."


Hardly believing in my escape, I kissed his hand and thought the loss
of my eye a light matter in consideration of my escaping from being
slain. I arrived at my uncle's capital; and, going in to him, told him
of what had befallen my father and myself; whereat he wept with sore
weeping and said, "Verily thou addest grief to my grief, and woe to my
woe; for thy cousin hath been missing these many days; I wot not what
hath happened to him, and none can give me news of him." And he wept
till he fainted. I sorrowed and condoled with him; and he would have
applied certain medicaments to my eye, but he saw that it was become as
a walnut with the shell empty. Then said he, "O my son, better to lose
eye and keep life!" After that I could no longer remain silent about my
cousin, who was his only son and one dearly loved, so I told him all
that had happened. He rejoiced with extreme joyance to hear news of his
son and said, "Come now and show me the tomb;" but I replied, "By
Allah, O my uncle, I know not its place, though I sought it carefully
full many times, yet could not find the site." However, I and my uncle
went to the graveyard and looked right and left, till at last I
recognised the tomb and we both rejoiced with exceeding joy. We entered
the sepulchre and loosened the earth about the grave; then, upraising
the trap door, descended some fifty steps till we came to the foot of
the staircase when lo! we were stopped by a blinding smoke. Thereupon
said my uncle that saying whose sayer shall never come to shame, "There
is no Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!" and we advanced till we suddenly came upon a saloon, whose
floor was strewed with flour and grain and provisions and all manner
necessaries; and in the midst of it stood a canopy sheltering a couch.
Thereupon my uncle went up to the couch and inspecting it found his son
and the lady who had gone down with him into the tomb, lying in each
other's embrace; but the twain had become black as charred wood; it was
as if they had been cast into a pit of fire. When my uncle saw this
spectacle, he spat in his son's face and said, "Thou hast thy deserts,
O thou hog![FN#196] this is thy judgment in the transitory world, and
yet remaineth the judgment in the world to come, a durer and a more
enduring "— And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

When it was the Twelfth Night,


She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kalandar
thus went on with his story before the lady and the Caliph and
Ja'afar:—My uncle struck his son with his slipper[FN#197] as he lay
there a black heap of coal. I marvelled at his hardness of heart, and
grieving for my cousin and the lady, said, "By Allah, O my uncle, calm
thy wrath: dost thou not see that all my thoughts are occupied with
this misfortune, and how sorrowful I am for what hath befallen thy son,
and how horrible it is that naught of him remaineth but a black heap of
charcoal? And is not that enough, but thou must smite him with thy
slipper?" Answered he,"O son of my brother, this youth from his boyhood
was madly in love with his own sister;[FN#198] and often and often I
forbade him from her, saying to myself:—They are but little ones.
However, when they grew up sin befel between them; and, although I
could hardly believe it, I confined him and chided him and threatened
him with the severest threats; and the eunuchs and servants said to
him:—Beware of so foul a thing which none before thee ever did, and
which none after thee will ever do; and have a care lest thou be
dishonoured and disgraced among the Kings of the day, even to the end
of time. And I added:—Such a report as this will be spread abroad by
caravans, and take heed not to give them cause to talk or I will
assuredly curse thee and do thee to death. After that I lodged them
apart and shut her up; but the accursed girl loved him with passionate
love, for Satan had got the mastery of her as well as of him and made
their foul sin seem fair in their sight. Now when my son saw that I
separated them, he secretly built this souterrain and furnished it and
transported to it victuals, even as thou seest; and, when I had gone
out a-sporting, came here with his sister and hid from me. Then His
righteous judgment fell upon the twain and consumed them with fire from
Heaven; and verily the last judgment will deal them durer pains and
more enduring!" Then he wept and I wept with him; and he looked at me
and said, "Thou art my son in his stead." And I bethought me awhile of
the world and of its chances, how the Wazir had slain my father and had
taken his place and had put out my eye; and how my cousin had come to
his death by the strangest chance: and I wept again and my uncle wept
with me. Then we mounted the steps and let down the iron plate and
heaped up the earth over it; and, after restoring the tomb to its
former condition, we returned to the palace. But hardly had we sat down
ere we heard the tomtoming of the kettle drum and tantara of trumpets
and clash of cymbals; and the rattling of war men's lances; and the
clamours of assailants and the clanking of bits and the neighing of
steeds; while the world was canopied with dense dust and sand clouds
raised by the horses' hoofs.[FN#199] We were amazed at sight and sound,
knowing not what could be the matter; so we asked and were told us that
the Wazir who usurped my father's kingdom had marched his men; and that
after levying his soldiery and taking a host of wild Arabs[FN#200] into
service, he had come down upon us with armies like the sands of the
sea; their number none could tell and against them none could prevail.
They attacked the city unawares; and the citizens, being powerless to
oppose them, surrendered the place: my uncle was slain and I made for
the suburbs saying to myself, "If thou fall into this villain's hands
he will assuredly kill thee." On this wise all my troubles were
renewed; and I pondered all that had betided my father and my uncle and
I knew not what to do; for if the city people or my father's troops had
recognised me they would have done their best to win favour by
destroying me; and I could think of no way to escape save by shaving
off my beard and my eyebrows. So I shore them off and, changing my fine
clothes for a Kalandar's rags, I fared forth from my uncle's capital
and made for this city; hoping that peradventure some one would assist
me to the presence of the Prince of the Faithful,[FN#201] and the
Caliph who is the Viceregent of Allah upon earth. Thus have I come
hither that I might tell him my tale and lay my case before him. I
arrived here this very night, and was standing in doubt whither I
should go, when suddenly I saw this second Kalandar; so I salam'd to
him saying—"I am a stranger!" and he answered:—"I too am a stranger!"
And as we were conversing behold, up came our companion, this third
Kalandar, and saluted us saying:—"I am a stranger!" And we
answered:—"We too be strangers!" Then we three walked on and together
till darkness overtook us and Destiny crave us to your house. Such,
then, is the cause of the shaving of my beard and mustachios and
eyebrows; and the manner of my losing my right eye. They marvelled much
at this tale and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "By Allah, I have not seen
nor have I heard the like of what hath happened to this Kalandar!"
Quoth the lady of the house, "Rub thy head and wend thy ways;" but he
replied, "I will not go, till I hear the history of the two others."
Thereupon the second Kalandar came forward; and, kissing the ground,
began to tell


The Second Kalandar’s Tale.


Know, O my lady, that I was not born one eyed and mine is a strange
story; an it were graven with needle graver on the eye corners, it were
a warner to whoso would be warned. I am a King, son of a King, and was
brought up like a Prince. I learned intoning the Koran according the
seven schools;[FN#202] and I read all manner books, and held
disputations on their contents with the doctors and men of science;
moreover I studied star lore and the fair sayings of poets and I
exercised myself in all branches of learning until I surpassed the
people of my time; my skill in calligraphy exceeded that of all the
scribes; and my fame was bruited abroad over all climes and cities, and
all the kings learned to know my name. Amongst others the King of Hind
heard of me and sent to my father to invite me to his court, with
offerings and presents and rarities such as befit royalties. So my
father fitted out six ships for me and my people; and we put to sea and
sailed for the space of a full month till we made the land. Then we
brought out the horses that were with us in the ships; and, after
loading the camels with our presents for the Prince, we set forth
inland. But we had marched only a little way, when behold, a dust cloud
up flew, and grew until it walled[FN#203] the horizon from view. After
an hour or so the veil lifted and discovered beneath it fifty horsemen,
ravening lions to the sight, in steel armour dight. We observed them
straightly and lo! they were cutters off of the highway, wild as wild
Arabs. When they saw that we were only four and had with us but the ten
camels carrying the presents, they dashed down upon us with lances at
rest. We signed to them, with our fingers, as it were saying, "We be
messengers of the great King of Hind, so harm us not!" but they
answered on like wise, "We are not in his dominions to obey nor are we
subject to his sway." Then they set upon us and slew some of my slaves
and put the lave to flight; and I also fled after I had gotten a wound,
a grievous hurt, whilst the Arabs were taken up with the money and the
presents which were with us. I went forth unknowing whither I went,
having become mean as I was mighty; and I fared on until I came to the
crest of a mountain where I took shelter for the night in a cave. When
day arose I set out again, nor ceased after this fashion till I arrived
at a fair city and a well filled. Now it was the season when Winter was
turning away with his rime and to greet the world with his flowers came
Prime, and the young blooms were springing and the streams flowed
ringing, and the birds were sweetly singing, as saith the poet
concerning a certain city when describing it:—

A place secure from every thought of fear * Safety and peace for ever
lord it here:
Its beauties seem to beautify its sons * And as in Heaven its happy
folk appear.


I was glad of my arrival for I was wearied with the way, and yellow of
face for weakness and want; but my plight was pitiable and I knew not
whither to betake me. So I accosted a Tailor sitting in his little shop
and saluted him; he returned my salam, and bade me kindly welcome and
wished me well and entreated me gently and asked me of the cause of my
strangerhood. I told him all my past from first to last; and he was
concerned on my account and said, "O youth, disclose not thy secret to
any: the King of this city is the greatest enemy thy father hath, and
there is blood wit[FN#204] between them and thou hast cause to fear for
thy life." Then he set meat and drink before me; and I ate and drank
and he with me; and we conversed freely till night fall, when he
cleared me a place in a corner of his shop and brought me a carpet and
a coverlet. I tarried with him three days; at the end of which time he
said to me, "Knowest thou no calling whereby to win thy living, O my
son?" "I am learned in the law," I replied, "and a doctor of doctrine;
an adept in art and science, a mathematician and a notable penman." He
rejoined, "Thy calling is of no account in our city, where not a soul
understandeth science or even writing or aught save money making." Then
said I, "By Allah, I know nothing but what I have mentioned;" and he
answered, "Gird thy middle and take thee a hatchet and a cord, and go
and hew wood in the wold for thy daily bread, till Allah send thee
relief; and tell none who thou art lest they slay thee." Then he bought
me an axe and a rope and gave me in charge to certain wood cutters; and
with these guardians I went forth into the forest, where I cut fuel
wood the whole of my day and came back in the evening bearing my bundle
on my head. I sold it for half a diner, with part of which I bought
provision and laid by the rest. In such work I spent a whole year and
when this was ended I went out one day, as was my wont, into the
wilderness; and, wandering away from my companions, I chanced on a
thickly grown lowland[FN#205] in which there was an abundance of wood.
So I entered and I found the gnarled stump of a great tree and loosened
the ground about it and shovelled away the earth. Presently my hatchet
rang upon a copper ring; so I cleared away the soil and behold, the
ring was attached to a wooden trap door. This I raised and there
appeared beneath it a staircase. I descended the steps to the bottom
and came to a door, which I opened and found myself in a noble hall
strong of structure and beautifully built, where was a damsel like a
pearl of great price, whose favour banished from my heart all grief and
cark and care; and whose soft speech healed the soul in despair and
captivated the wise and ware. Her figure measured five feet in height;
her breasts were firm and upright; her cheek a very garden of delight;
her colour lively bright; her face gleamed like dawn through curly
tresses which gloomed like night, and above the snows of her bosom
glittered teeth of a pearly white.[FN#206] As the poet said of one like
her:—

Slim waisted loveling jetty hair encrowned * A wand of willow on a
sandy mound:


And as saith another.—

Four things that meet not, save they here unite * To shed my heart
blood and to rape my sprite:
Brilliantest forehead; tresses jetty bright; * Cheeks rosy red and
stature beauty dight.


When I looked upon her I prostrated myself before Him who had created
her, for the beauty and loveliness He had shaped in her, and she looked
at me and said, "Art thou man or Jinni?" "I am a man," answered I, and
she, "Now who brought thee to this place where I have abided five and
twenty years without even yet seeing man in it?" Quoth I (and indeed I
found her words wonder sweet, and my heart was melted to the core by
them), "O my lady, my good fortune led me hither for the dispelling of
my cark and care." Then I related to her all my mishap from first to
last, and my case appeared to her exceeding grievous; so she wept and
said, "I will tell thee my story in my turn. I am the daughter of the
King Ifitamus, lord of the Islands of Abnus,[FN#207] who married me to
my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle; but on my wedding night an
Ifrit named Jirjís[FN#208] bin Rajmús, first cousin that is, mother's
sister's son, of Iblís, the Foul Fiend, snatched me up and, flying away
with me like a bird, set me down in this place, whither he conveyed all
I needed of fine stuffs, raiment and jewels and furniture, and meat and
drink and other else. Once in every ten days he comes here and lies a
single night with me, and then wends his way, for he took me without
the consent of his family; and he hath agreed with me that if ever I
need him by night or by day, I have only to pass my hand over yonder
two lines engraved upon the alcove, and he will appear to me before my
fingers cease touching. Four days have now passed since he was here;
and, as there remain six days before he come again, say me, wilt thou
abide with me five days, and go hence the day before his coming?" I
replied "Yes, and yes again! O rare, if all this be not a dream!"
Hereat she was glad and, springing to her feet, seized my hand and
carried me through an arched doorway to a Hammam bath, a fair hall and
richly decorate. I doffed my clothes, and she doffed hers; then we
bathed and she washed me; and when this was done we left the bath, and
she seated me by her side upon a high divan, and brought me sherbet
scented with musk. When we felt cool after the bath, she set food
before me and we ate and fell to talking; but presently she said to me,
"Lay thee down and take thy rest, for surely thou must be weary." So I
thanked her, my lady, and lay down and slept soundly, forgetting all
that had happened to me. When I awoke I found her rubbing and
shampooing my feet;[FN#209] so I again thanked her and blessed her and
we sat for awhile talking. Said she, "By Allah, I was sad at heart, for
that I have dwelt alone underground for these five and twenty years;
and praise be to Allah, who hath sent me some one with whom I can
converse!" Then she asked, "O youth, what sayest thou to wine?" and I
answered, "Do as thou wilt." Whereupon she went to a cupboard and took
out a sealed flask of right old wine and set off the table with flowers
and scented herbs and began to sing these lines:—

"Had we known of thy coming we fain had dispread * The cores of our
hearts or the balls of our eyes;
Our cheeks as a carpet to greet thee had thrown * And our eyelids had
strown for thy feet to betread."


Now when she finished her verse I thanked her, for indeed love of her
had gotten hold of my heart and my grief and anguish were gone. We sat
at converse and carousel till nightfall, and with her I spent the
night—such night never spent I in all my life! On the morrow delight
followed delight till midday, by which time I had drunken wine so
freely that I had lost my wits, and stood up, staggering to the right
and to the left, and said "Come, O my charmer, and I will carry thee up
from this underground vault and deliver thee from the spell of thy
Jinni." She laughed and replied "Content thee and hold thy peace: of
every ten days one is for the Ifrit and the other nine are thine."
Quoth I (and in good sooth drink had got the better of me), "This very
instant will I break down the alcove whereon is graven the talisman and
summon the Ifrit that I may slay him, for it is a practice of mine to
slay Ifrits!" When she heard my words her colour waxed wan and she
said, "By Allah, do not!" and she began repeating:—

"This is a thing wherein destruction lies * I rede thee shun it an thy
wits be wise."


And these also:—

"O thou who seekest severance, draw the rein * Of thy swift steed nor
seek o'ermuch t' advance;
Ah stay! for treachery is the rule of life, * And sweets of meeting end
in severance."


I heard her verse but paid no heed to her words, nay, I raised my foot
and administered to the alcove a mighty kick. And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

When it was the Thirteenth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the second
Kalandar thus continued his tale to the lady:—But when, O my mistress,
I kicked that alcove with a mighty kick, behold, the air starkened and
darkened and thundered and lightened; the earth trembled and quaked and
the world became invisible. At once the fumes of wine left my head: I
cried to her, "What is the matter?" and she replied, "The Ifrit is upon
us! did I not warn thee of this? By Allah, thou hast brought ruin upon
me; but fly for thy life and go up by the way thou camest down!" So I
fled up the staircase; but, in the excess of my fear, I forgot sandals
and hatchet. And when I had mounted two steps I turned to look for
them, and lo! I saw the earth cleave asunder, and there arose from it
an Ifrit, a monster of hideousness, who said to the damsel "What
trouble and pother be this wherewith thou disturbest me? What mishap
hath betided thee?" "No mishap hath befallen me" she answered, "save
that my breast was straitened[FN#210] and my heart heavy with sadness!
so I drank a little wine to broaden it and to hearten myself; then I
rose to obey a call of Nature, but the wine had gotten into my head and
I fell against the alcove." "Thou liest, like the whore thou art!"
shrieked the Ifrit; and he looked around the hall right and left till
he caught sight of my axe and sandals and said to her, "What be these
but the belongings of some mortal who hath been in thy society?" She
answered, "I never set eyes upon them till this moment: they must have
been brought by thee hither cleaving to thy garments." Quoth the Ifrit,
"These words are absurd; thou harlot! thou strumpet!" Then he stripped
her stark naked and, stretching her upon the floor, bound her hands and
feet to four stakes, like one crucified;[FN#211] and set about
torturing and trying to make her confess. I could not bear to stand
listening to her cries and groans; so I climbed the stair on the quake
with fear; and when I reached the top I replaced the trap door and
covered it with earth. Then repented I of what I had done with
penitence exceeding; and thought of the lady and her beauty and
loveliness, and the tortures she was suffering at the hands of the
accursed Ifrit, after her quiet life of five and twenty years; and how
all that had happened to her was for the cause of me. I bethought me of
my father and his kingly estate and how I had become a woodcutter; and
how, after my time had been awhile serene, the world had again waxed
turbid and troubled to me. So I wept bitterly and repeated this
couplet:—

What time Fate's tyranny shall most oppress thee * Perpend! one day
shall joy thee, one distress thee!


Then I walked till I reached the home of my friend, the Tailor, whom I
found most anxiously expecting me; indeed he was, as the saying goes,
on coals of fire for my account. And when he saw me he said, "All night
long my heart hath been heavy, fearing for thee from wild beasts or
other mischances. Now praise be to Allah for thy safety!" I thanked him
for his friendly solicitude and, retiring to my corner, sat pondering
and musing on what had befallen me; and I blamed and chided myself for
my meddlesome folly and my frowardness in kicking the alcove. I was
calling myself to account when behold, my friend, the Tailor, came to
me and said, "O youth, in the shop there is an old man, a
Persian,[FN#212] who seeketh thee: he hath thy hatchet and thy sandals
which he had taken to the woodcutters,[FN#213] saying, "I was going out
at what time the Mu'azzin began the call to dawn prayer, when I chanced
upon these things and know not whose they are; so direct me to their
owner." The woodcutters recognised thy hatchet and directed him to
thee: he is sitting in my shop, so fare forth to him and thank him and
take thine axe and sandals." When I heard these words I turned yellow
with fear and felt stunned as by a blow; and, before I could recover
myself, lo! the floor of my private room clove asunder, and out of it
rose the Persian who was the Ifrit. He had tortured the lady with
exceeding tortures, natheless she would not confess to him aught; so he
took the hatchet and sandals and said to her, "As surely as I am Jirjis
of the seed of Iblis, I will bring thee back the owner of this and
these!"[FN#214] Then he went to the woodcutters with the pretence
aforesaid and, being directed to me, after waiting a while in the shop
till the fact was confirmed, he suddenly snatched me up as a hawk
snatcheth a mouse and flew high in air; but presently descended and
plunged with me under the earth (I being aswoon the while), and lastly
set me down in the subterranean palace wherein I had passed that
blissful night. And there I saw the lady stripped to the skin, her
limbs bound to four stakes and blood welling from her sides. At the
sight my eyes ran over with tears; but the Ifrit covered her person and
said, "O wanton, is not this man thy lover?" She looked upon me and
replied, "I wot him not nor have I ever seen him before this hour!"
Quoth the Ifrit, "What! this torture and yet no confessing;" and quoth
she,"I never saw this man in my born days, and it is not lawful in
Allah's sight to tell lies on him." "If thou know him not," said the
Ifrit to her, “take this sword and strike off his head.”[FN#215] She
hent the sword in hand and came close up to me; and I signalled to her
with my eyebrows, my tears the while flowing adown my cheeks. She
understood me and made answer, also by signs, "How couldest thou bring
all this evil upon me?" and I rejoined after the same fashion, "This is
the time for mercy and forgiveness." And the mute tongue of my
case[FN#216] spake aloud saying:—

Mine eyes were dragomans for my tongue betied * And told full clear the
love I fain would hide:
When last we met and tears in torrents railed * For tongue struck dumb
my glances testified:
She signed with eye glance while her lips were mute * I signed with
fingers and she kenned th' implied:
Our eyebrows did all duty 'twixt us twain; * And we being speechless
Love spake loud and plain.


Then, O my mistress, the lady threw away the sword and said, "How shall
I strike the neck of one I wot not, and who hath done me no evil? Such
deed were not lawful in my law!" and she held her hand. Said the Ifrit,
"'Tis grievous to thee to slay thy lover; and, because he hath lain
with thee, thou endurest these torments and obstinately refusest to
confess. After this it is clear to me that only like loveth and pitieth
like." Then he turned to me and asked me, "O man, haply thou also dost
not know this woman;" whereto I answered, "And pray who may she be?
assuredly I never saw her till this instant." "Then take the sword,"
said he "and strike off her head and I will believe that thou wottest
her not and will leave thee free to go, and will not deaf 'hardly with
thee." I replied, "That will I do;" and, taking the sword went forward
sharply and raised my hand to smite. But she signed to me with her
eyebrows, "Have I failed thee in aught of love; and is it thus that
thou requitest me?" I understood what her looks implied and answered
her with an eye-glance, "I will sacrifice my soul for thee." And the
tongue of the case wrote in our hearts these lines:—

How many a lover with his eyebrows speaketh * To his beloved, as his
passion pleadeth:
With flashing eyne his passion he inspireth * And well she seeth what
kits pleading needeth.
How sweet the look when each on other gazeth; * And with what swiftness
and how sure it speedeth:
And this with eyebrows all his passion writeth; * And that with
eyeballs all his passion readeth.


Then my eyes filled with tears to overflowing and I cast the sword from
my hand saying, "O mighty Ifrit and hero, if a woman lacking wits and
faith deem it unlawful to strike off my head, how can it be lawful for
me, a man, to smite her neck whom I never saw in my whole life. I
cannot do such misdeed though thou cause me drink the cup of death and
perdition." Then said the Ifrit, "Ye twain show the good understanding
between you; but I will let you see how such doings end." He took the
sword, and struck off the lady's hands first, with four strokes, and
then her feet; whilst I looked on and made sure of death and she
farewelled me with her dying eyes. So the Ifrit cried at her, "Thou
whorest and makest me a wittol with thine eyes;" and struck her so that
her head went flying. Then he turned to me and said, "O mortal, we have
it in our law that, when the wife committeth advowtry it is lawful for
us to slay her. As for this damsel I snatched her away on her
bride-night when she was a girl of twelve and she knew no one but
myself. I used to come to her once every ten days and lie with her the
night, under the semblance of a man, a Persian; and when I was well
assured that she had cuckolded me, I slew her. But as for thee I am not
well satisfied that thou hast wronged me in her; nevertheless I must
not let thee go unharmed; so ask a boon of me and I will grant it."
Then I rejoiced, O my lady, with exceeding joy and said, "What boon
shall I crave of thee?" He replied, "Ask me this boon; into what shape
I shall bewitch thee; wilt thou be a dog, or an ass or an ape?" I
rejoined (and indeed I had hoped that mercy might be shown me), "By
Allah, spare me, that Allah spare thee for sparing a Moslem and a man
who never wronged thee." And I humbled myself before him with exceeding
humility, and remained standing in his presence, saying, "I am sore
oppressed by circumstance." He replied "Talk me no long talk, it is in
my power to slay thee; but I give thee instead thy choice." Quoth I, "O
thou Ifrit, it would besit thee to pardon me even as the Envied
pardoned the Envier." Quoth he, "And how was that?" and I began to tell
him