story of the Merchant and the Jinni;" and she answered "With joy and
goodly gree, if the King permit me." Then quoth the King, "Tell thy
tale;" and Shahrazad began in these words: It hath reached me, O
auspicious King and Heaven directed Ruler! that when the merchant
purposed the sacrifice of the calf but saw it weeping, his heart
relented and he said to the herdsman, "Keep the calf among my cattle."
All this the old Shaykh told the Jinni who marvelled much at these
strange words. Then the owner of the gazelle continued:—O Lord of the
Kings of the Jann, this much took place and my uncle's daughter, this
gazelle, looked on and saw it, and said, "Butcher me this calf, for
surely it is a fat one;" but I bade the herdsman take it away and he
took it and turned his face homewards. On the next day as I was sitting
in my own house, lo! the herdsman came and, standing before me said, "O
my master, I will tell thee a thing which shall gladden thy soul, and
shall gain me the gift of good tidings."[FN#50] I answered, "Even so."
Then said he, "O merchant, I have a daughter, and she learned magic in
her childhood from an old woman who lived with us. Yesterday when thou
gavest me the calf, I went into the house to her, and she looked upon
it and veiled her face; then she wept and laughed alternately and at
last she said:—O my father, hath mine honour become so cheap to thee
that thou bringest in to me strange men? I asked her:—Where be these
strange men and why wast thou laughing, and crying?; and she answered,
Of a truth this calf which is with thee is the son of our master, the
merchant; but he is ensorcelled by his stepdame who bewitched both him
and his mother: such is the cause of my laughing; now the reason of his
weeping is his mother, for that his father slew her unawares. Then I
marvelled at this with exceeding marvel and hardly made sure that day
had dawned before I came to tell thee." When I heard, O Jinni, my
herdsman's words, I went out with him, and I was drunken without wine,
from the excess of joy and gladness which came upon me, until I reached
his house. There his daughter welcomed me and kissed my hand, and
forthwith the calf came and fawned upon me as before. Quoth I to the
herdsman's daughter, "Is this true that thou sayest of this calf?"
Quoth she, "Yea, O my master, he is thy son, the very core of thy
heart." I rejoiced and said to her, "O maiden, if thou wilt release him
thine shall be whatever cattle and property of mine are under thy
father's hand." She smiled and answered, "O my master, I have no greed
for the goods nor will I take them save on two conditions; the first
that thou marry me to thy son and the second that I may bewitch her who
bewitched him and imprison her, otherwise I cannot be safe from her
malice and malpractices." Now when I heard, O Jinni, these, the words
of the herdsman's daughter, I replied, "Beside what thou askest all the
cattle and the household stuff in thy father's charge are thine and, as
for the daughter of my uncle, her blood is lawful to thee." When I had
spoken, she took a cup and filled it with water: then she recited a
spell over it and sprinkled it upon the calf, saying, "If Almighty
Allah created thee a calf, remain so shaped, and change not; but if
thou be enchanted, return to thy whilom form, by command of Allah Most
Highest!" and lo! he trembled and became a man. Then I fell on his neck
and said, "Allah upon thee, tell me all that the daughter of my uncle
did by thee and by thy mother." And when he told me what had come to
pass between them I said, " O my son, Allah favoured thee with one to
restore thee, and thy right hath returned to thee." Then, O Jinni, I
married the herdsman's daughter to him, and she transformed my wife
into this gazelle, saying:—Her shape is a comely and by no means
loathsome. After this she abode with us night and day, day and night,
till the Almighty took her to Himself. When she deceased, my son fared
forth to the cities of Hind, even to the city of this man who hath done
to thee what hath been done;[FN#51] and I also took this gazelle (my
cousin) and wandered with her from town to town seeking tidings of my
son, till Destiny drove me to this place where I saw the merchant
sitting in tears. Such is my tale! Quoth the Jinni, "This story is
indeed strange, and therefore I grant thee the third part of his
blood." Thereupon the second old man, who owned the two greyhounds,
came up and said, " O Jinni, if I recount to thee what befel me from my
brothers, these two hounds, and thou see that it is a tale even more
wondrous and marvellous than what thou hast heard, wilt thou grant to
me also the third of this man's blood?" Replied the Jinni, "Thou hast
my word for it, if thine adventures be more marvellous and wondrous."
Thereupon he thus began


The Second Shaykh’s Story.


Know, O lord of the Kings of the Jann! that these two dogs are my
brothers and I am the third. Now when our father died and left us a
capital of three thousand gold pieces,[FN#52] I opened a shop with my
share, and bought and sold therein, and in like guise did my two
brothers, each setting up a shop. But I had been in business no long
while before the elder sold his stock for a thousand dinars, and after
buying outfit and merchandise, went his ways to foreign parts. He was
absent one whole year with the caravan; but one day as I sat in my
shop, behold, a beggar stood before me asking alms, and I said to him,
"Allah open thee another door!"[FN#53] Whereupon he answered, weeping
the while, "Am I so changed that thou knowest me not?" Then I looked at
him narrowly, and lo! it was my brother, so I rose to him and welcomed
him; then I seated him in my shop and put questions concerning his
case. "Ask me not," answered he; "my wealth is awaste and my state hath
waxed unstated!" So I took him to the Hammam bath[FN#54] and clad him
in a suit of my own and gave him lodging in my house. Moreover, after
looking over the accounts of my stock in trade and the profits of my
business, I found that industry had gained me one thousand dinars,
while my principal, the head of my wealth, amounted to two thousand. So
I shared the whole with him saying, "Assume that thou hast made no
journey abroad but hast remained at home; and be not cast down by thine
ill luck." He took the share in great glee and opened for himself a
shop; and matters went on quietly for a few nights and days. But
presently my second brother (yon other dog), also setting his heart
upon travel, sold off what goods and stock in trade he had, and albeit
we tried to stay him he would not be stayed: he laid in an outfit for
the journey and fared forth with certain wayfarers. After an absence of
a whole year he came back to me, even as my elder brother had come
back; and when I said to him, "O my brother, did I not dissuade thee
from travel?" he shed tears and cried, "O my brother, this be destiny's
decree: here I am a mere beggar, penniless[FN#55] and without a shirt
to my back." So I led him to the bath, O Jinni, and clothing him in new
clothes of my own wear, I went with him to my shop and served him with
meat and drink. Furthermore I said to him, "O my brother, I am wont to
cast up my shop accounts at the head of every year, and whatso I shall
find of surplusage is between me and thee."[FN#56] So I proceeded, O
Ifrit, to strike a balance and, finding two thousand dinars of profit,
I returned praises to the Creator (be He extolled and exalted!) and
made over one half to my brother, keeping the other to myself.
Thereupon he busied himself with opening a shop and on this wise we
abode many days. After a time my brothers began pressing me to travel
with them; but I refused saying, "What gained ye by travel voyage that
I should gain thereby?" As I would not give ear to them we went back
each to his own shop where we bought and sold as before. They kept
urging me to travel for a whole twelvemonth, but I refused to do so
till full six years were past and gone when I consented with these
words, "O my brothers, here am I, your companion of travel: now let me
see what monies you have by you." I found, however, that they had not a
doit, having squandered their substance in high diet and drinking and
carnal delights. Yet I spoke not a word of reproach; so far from it I
looked over my shop accounts once more, and sold what goods and stock
in trade were mine; and, finding myself the owner of six thousand
ducats, I gladly proceeded to divide that sum in halves, saying to my
brothers, "These three thousand gold pieces are for me and for you to
trade withal," adding, "Let us bury the other moiety underground that
it may be of service in case any harm befal us, in which case each
shall take a thousand wherewith to open shops." Both replied, "Right is
thy recking;" and I gave to each one his thousand gold pieces, keeping
the same sum for myself, to wit, a thousand dinars. We then got ready
suitable goods and hired a ship and, having embarked our merchandise,
proceeded on our voyage, day following day, a full month, after which
we arrived at a city, where we sold our venture; and for every piece of
gold we gained ten. And as we turned again to our voyage we found on
the shore of the sea a maiden clad in worn and ragged gear, and she
kissed my hand and said, "O master, is there kindness in thee and
charity? I can make thee a fitting return for them." I answered, "Even
so; truly in me are benevolence and good works, even though thou render
me no return." Then she said, "Take me to wife, O my master, and carry
me to thy city, for I have given myself to thee; so do me a kindness
and I am of those who be meet for good works and charity: I will make
thee a fitting return for these and be thou not shamed by my
condition." When I heard her words, my heart yearned towards her, in
such sort as willed it Allah (be He extolled and exalted!); and took
her and clothed her and made ready for her a fair resting place in the
vessel, and honourably entreated her. So we voyaged on, and my heart
became attached to her with exceeding attachment, and I was separated
from her neither night nor day, and I paid more regard to her than to
my brothers. Then they were estranged from me, and waxed jealous of my
wealth and the quantity of merchandise I had, and their eyes were
opened covetously upon all my property. So they took counsel to murder
me and seize my wealth, saying, "Let us slay our brother and all his
monies will be ours;" and Satan made this deed seem fair in their
sight; so when they found me in privacy (and I sleeping by my wife's
side) they took us both up and cast us into the sea. My wife awoke
startled from her sleep and, forthright becoming an Ifritah,[FN#57] she
bore me up and carried me to an island and disappeared for a short
time; but she returned in the morning and said, "Here am I, thy
faithful slave, who hath made thee due recompense; for I bore thee up
in the waters and saved thee from death by command of the Almighty.
Know—that I am a Jinniyah, and as I saw thee my heart loved thee by
will of the Lord, for I am a believer in Allah and in His Apostle (whom
Heaven bless and preserve!). Thereupon I came to thee conditioned as
thou sawest me and thou didst marry me, and see now I have saved thee
from sinking. But I am angered against thy brothers and assuredly I
must slay them." When I heard her story I was surprised and, thanking
her for all she had done, I said, "But as to slaying my brothers this
must not be." Then I told her the tale of what had come to pass with
them from the beginning of our lives to the end, and on hearing it
quoth she, "This night will I fly as a bird over them and will sink
their ship and slay them." Quoth I, "Allah upon thee, do not thus, for
the proverb saith, O thou who doest good to him that doth evil, leave
the evil doer to his evil deeds. Moreover they are still my brothers."
But she rejoined, "By Allah, there is no help for it but I slay them."
I humbled myself before her for their pardon, whereupon she bore me up
and flew away with me till at last she set me down on the terrace roof
of my own house. I opened the doors and took up what I had hidden in
the ground; and after I had saluted the folk I opened my shop and
bought me merchandise. Now when night came on I went home, and there I
saw these two hounds tied up; and, when they sighted me, they arose and
whined and fawned upon me; but ere I knew what happened my wife said,
"These two dogs be thy brothers!" I answered, "And who hath done this
thing by them?" and she rejoined, "I sent a message to my sister and
she entreated them on this wise, nor shall these two be released from
their present shape till ten years shall have passed." And now I have
arrived at this place on my way to my wife's sister that she may
deliver them from this condition, after their having endured it for
half a score of years. As I was wending onwards I saw this young man,
who acquainted me with what had befallen him, and I determined not to
fare hence until I should see what might occur between thee and him.
Such is my tale! Then said the Jinni, "Surely this is a strange story
and therefor I give thee the third portion of his blood and his crime."
Thereupon quoth the third Shaykh, the master of the mare mule, to the
Jinni, "I can tell thee a tale more wondrous than these two, so thou
grant me the remainder of his blood and of his offense," and the Jinni
answered, "So be it!" Then the old man began


The Third Shaykh’s Story.


Know, O Sultan and head of the Jann, that this mule was my wife. Now it
so happened that I went forth and was absent one whole year; and when I
returned from my journey I came to her by night, and saw a black slave
lying with her on the carpet bed and they were talking, and dallying,
and laughing, and kissing and playing the close buttock game. When she
saw me, she rose and came hurriedly at me with a gugglet[FN#58] of
water; and, muttering spells over it, she besprinkled me and said,
"Come forth from this thy shape into the shape of a dog;" and I became
on the instant a dog. She drove me out of the house, and I ran through
the doorway nor ceased running until I came to a butcher's stall, where
I stopped and began to eat what bones were there. When the stall owner
saw me, he took me and led me into his house, but as soon as his
daughter had sight of me she veiled her face from me, crying out, "Dost
thou bring men to me and dost thou come in with them to me?" Her father
asked, "Where is the man?"; and she answered, "This dog is a man whom
his wife hath ensorcelled and I am able to release him." When her
father heard her words, he said, "Allah upon thee, O my daughter,
release him." So she took a gugglet of water and, after uttering words
over it, sprinkled upon me a few drops, saying, "Come forth from that
form into thy former form." And I returned to my natural shape. Then I
kissed her hand and said, "I wish thou wouldest transform my wife even
as she transformed me." Thereupon she gave me some water, saying, "As
soon as thou see her asleep, sprinkle this liquid upon her and speak
what words thou heardest me utter, so shall she become whatsoever thou
desirest." I went to my wife and found her fast asleep; and, while
sprinkling the water upon her, I said, "Come forth from that form into
the form of a mare mule." So she became on the instant a she mule, and
she it is whom thou seest with thine eyes, O Sultan and head of the
Kings of the Jann! Then the Jinni turned towards her and said, "Is this
sooth?" And she nodded her head and replied by signs, "Indeed, 'tis the
truth: for such is my tale and this is what hath befallen me." Now when
the old man had ceased speaking the Jinni shook with pleasure and gave
him the third of the merchant's blood. And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say. Then quoth Dunyazad, "O. my
sister, how pleasant is thy tale, and how tasteful; how sweet and how
grateful!" She replied, "And what is this compared with that I could
tell thee, the night to come, if I live and the King spare me?"[FN#59]
Then thought the King, "By Allah, I will not slay her until I hear the
rest of her tale, for truly it is wondrous." So they rested that night
in mutual embrace until the dawn. After this the King went forth to his
Hall of Estate, and the Wazir and the troops came in and the court was
crowded, and the King gave orders and judged and appointed and deposed,
bidding and forbidding during the rest of the day. Then the Divan broke
up, and King Shahryar entered his palace.

When it was the Third Night,


And the King had had his will of the Wazir's daughter, Dunyazad, her
sister, said to her, "Finish for us that tale of thine;" and she
replied, "With joy and goodly gree! It hath reached me, O auspicious
King, that when the third old man told a tale to the Jinni more
wondrous than the two preceding, the Jinni marvelled with exceeding
marvel, and, shaking with delight, cried, Lo! I have given thee the
remainder of the merchant's punishment and for thy sake have I released
him." Thereupon the merchant embraced the old men and thanked them, and
these Shaykhs wished him joy on being saved and fared forth each one
for his own city. Yet this tale is not more wondrous than the
fisherman's story." Asked the King, "What is the fisherman's story?"
And she answered by relating the tale of


THE FISHERMAN AND THE JINNI.


It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was a Fisher man well
stricken in years who had a wife and three children, and withal was of
poor condition. Now it was his custom to cast his net every day four
times, and no more. On a day he went forth about noontide to the sea
shore, where he laid down his basket; and, tucking up his shirt and
plunging into the water, made a cast with his net and waited till it
settled to the bottom. Then he gathered the cords together and haled
away at it, but found it weighty; and however much he drew it
landwards, he could not pull it up; so he carried the ends ashore and
drove a stake into the ground and made the net fast to it. Then he
stripped and dived into the water all about the net, and left not off
working hard until he had brought it up. He rejoiced thereat and,
donning his clothes, went to the net, when he found in it a dead
jackass which had torn the meshes. Now when he saw it, he exclaimed in
his grief, "There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in Allah
the Glorious, the Great!" Then quoth he, "This is a strange manner of
daily bread;" and he began re citing in extempore verse:—

O toiler through the glooms of night in peril and in pain * Thy toiling
stint for daily bread comes not by might and main!
Seest thou not the fisher seek afloat upon the sea * His bread, while
glimmer stars of night as set in tangled skein.
Anon he plungeth in despite the buffet of the waves * The while to
sight the bellying net his eager glances strain;
Till joying at the night's success, a fish he bringeth home * Whose
gullet by the hook of Fate was caught and cut in twain.
When buys that fish of him a man who spent the hours of night *
Reckless of cold and wet and gloom in ease and comfort fain,
Laud to the Lord who gives to this, to that denies his wishes * And
dooms one toil and catch the prey and other eat the fishes.[FN#60]


Then quoth he, "Up and to it; I am sure of His beneficence,
Inshallah!" So he continued:—

When thou art seized of Evil Fate, assume * The noble soul's long
suffering: 'tis thy best:
Complain not to the creature; this be plaint * From one most Ruthful to
the ruthlessest.


The Fisherman, when he had looked at the dead ass, got it free of the
toils and wrung out and spread his net; then he plunged into the sea,
saying, "In Allah's name!" and made a cast and pulled at it, but it
grew heavy and settled down more firmly than the first time. Now he
thought that there were fish in it, and he made it fast, and doffing
his clothes went into the water, and dived and haled until he drew it
up upon dry land. Then found he in it a large earthen pitcher which was
full of sand and mud; and seeing this he was greatly troubled and began
repeating these verses[FN#61]:—

Forbear, O troubles of the world, * And pardon an ye nill forbear:
I went to seek my daily bread * I find that breadless I must fare:
For neither handcraft brings me aught * Nor Fate allots to me a share:
How many fools the Pleiads reach * While darkness whelms the wise and
ware.


So he prayed pardon of Allah and, throwing away the jar, wrung his net
and cleansed it and returned to the sea the third time to cast his net
and waited till it had sunk. Then he pulled at it and found therein
potsherds and broken glass; whereupon he began to speak these verses:—

He is to thee that daily bread thou canst nor loose nor bind * Nor pen
nor writ avail thee aught thy daily bread to find:
For joy and daily bread are what Fate deigneth to allow; * This soil is
sad and sterile ground, while that makes glad the hind.
The shafts of Time and Life bear down full many a man of worth * While
bearing up to high degree wights of ignoble mind.
So come thou, Death! for verily life is not worth a straw * When low
the falcon falls withal the mallard wings the wind:
No wonder 'tis thou seest how the great of soul and mind * Are poor,
and many a losel carle to height of luck designed.
This bird shall overfly the world from east to furthest west * And that
shall win her every wish though ne'er she leave the nest.


Then raising his eyes heavenwards he said, "O my God![FN#62] verily
Thou wottest that I cast not my net each day save four times[FN#63];
the third is done and as yet Thou hast vouchsafed me nothing. So this
time, O my God, deign give me my daily bread." Then, having called on
Allah's name,[FN#64] he again threw his net and waited its sinking and
settling; whereupon he haled at it but could not draw it in for that it
was entangled at the bottom. He cried out in his vexation "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" and he began reciting:—

Fie on this wretched world, an so it be * I must be whelmed by grief
and misery:
Tho' gladsome be man's lot when dawns the morn * He drains the cup of
woe ere eve he see:
Yet was I one of whom the world when asked * "Whose lot is happiest?"
oft would say "'Tis he!"


Thereupon he stripped and, diving down to the net, busied himself with
it till it came to land. Then he opened the meshes and found therein a
cucumber shaped jar of yellow copper,[FN#65] evidently full of
something, whose mouth was made fast with a leaden cap, stamped with
the seal ring of our Lord Sulayman son of David (Allah accept the
twain!). Seeing this the Fisherman rejoiced and said, "If I sell it in
the brass bazar 'tis worth ten golden dinars." He shook it and finding
it heavy continued, "Would to Heaven I knew what is herein. But I must
and will open it and look to its contents and store it in my bag and
sell it in the brass market." And taking out a knife he worked at the
lead till he had loosened it from the jar; then he laid the cup on the
ground and shook the vase to pour out whatever might be inside. He
found nothing in it; whereat he marvelled with an exceeding marvel. But
presently there came forth from the jar a smoke which spired
heavenwards into aether (whereat he again marvelled with mighty
marvel), and which trailed along earth's surface till presently, having
reached its full height, the thick vapour condensed, and became an
Ifrit, huge of bulk, whose crest touched the clouds while his feet were
on the ground. His head was as a dome, his hands like pitchforks, his
legs long as masts and his mouth big as a cave; his teeth were like
large stones, his nostrils ewers, his eyes two lamps and his look was
fierce and lowering. Now when the Fisherman saw the Ifrit his side
muscles quivered, his teeth chattered, his spittle dried up and he
became blind about what to do. Upon this the Ifrit looked at him and
cried, "There is no god but the God, and Sulayman is the prophet of
God;" presently adding, "O Apostle of Allah, slay me not; never again
will I gainsay thee in word nor sin against thee in deed."[FN#66] Quoth
the Fisherman, "O Marid,[FN#67] diddest thou say, Sulayman the Apostle
of Allah; and Sulayman is dead some thousand and eight hundred years
ago,[FN#68] and we are now in the last days of the world! What is thy
story, and what is thy account of thyself, and what is the cause of thy
entering into this cucurbit?" Now when the Evil Spirit heard the words
of the Fisher man, quoth he; "There is no god but the God: be of good
cheer, O Fisherman!" Quoth the Fisherman, "Why biddest thou me to be of
good cheer?" and he replied, "Because of thy having to die an ill death
in this very hour." Said the Fisherman, "Thou deservest for thy good
tidings the withdrawal of Heaven's protection, O thou distant
one![FN#69] Wherefore shouldest thou kill me and what thing have I done
to deserve death, I who freed thee from the jar, and saved thee from
the depths of the sea, and brought thee up on the dry land?" Replied
the Ifrit, "Ask of me only what mode of death thou wilt die, and by
what manner of slaughter shall I slay thee." Rejoined the Fisherman,
"What is my crime and wherefore such retribution?" Quoth the Ifrit,
"Hear my story, O Fisherman!" and he answered, "Say on, and be brief in
thy saying, for of very sooth my life breath is in my nostrils."[FN#70]
Thereupon quoth the Jinni, "Know, that I am one among the heretical
Jann and I sinned against Sulayman, David son (on the twain be peace!)
I together with the famous Sakhr al Jinni;"[FN#71] whereupon the
Prophet sent his minister, Asaf son of Barkhiya, to seize me; and this
Wazir brought me against my will and led me in bonds to him (I being
downcast despite my nose) and he placed me standing before him like a
suppliant. When Sulayman saw me, he took refuge with Allah and bade me
embrace the True Faith and obey his behests; but I refused, so sending
for this cucurbit[FN#72] he shut me up therein, and stopped it over
with lead whereon he impressed the Most High Name, and gave his orders
to the Jann who carried me off, and cast me into the midmost of the
ocean. There I abode an hundred years, during which I said in my heart,
"Whoso shall release me, him will I enrich for ever and ever." But the
full century went by and, when no one set me free, I entered upon the
second five score saying, "Whoso shall release me, for him I will open
the hoards of the earth." Still no one set me free and thus four
hundred years passed away. Then quoth I, "Whoso shall release me, for
him will I fulfil three wishes." Yet no one set me free. Thereupon I
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and said to myself, "Whoso shall
release me from this time forth, him will I slay and I will give him
choice of what death he will die; and now, as thou hast released me, I
give thee full choice of deaths." The Fisherman, hearing the words of
the Ifrit, said, "O Allah! the wonder of it that I have not come to
free thee save in these days!" adding, "Spare my life, so Allah spare
thine; and slay me not, lest Allah set one to slay thee." Replied the
Contumacious One, "There is no help for it; die thou must; so ask me by
way of boon what manner of death thou wilt die." Albeit thus certified
the Fisherman again addressed the Ifrit saying, "Forgive me this my
death as a generous reward for having freed thee;" and the Ifrit,
"Surely I would not slay thee save on account of that same release." "O
Chief of the Ifrits," said the Fisherman, "I do thee good and thou
requitest me with evil! in very sooth the old saw lieth not when it
saith:—

We wrought them weal, they met our weal with ill; * Such, by my life!
is every bad man's labour:
To him who benefits unworthy wights * Shall hap what inapt to Ummi
Amir's neighbor.[FN#73]"


Now when the Ifrit heard these words he answered, "No more of this
talk, needs must I kill thee." Upon this the Fisherman said to himself,
"This is a Jinni; and I am a man to whom Allah hath given a passably
cunning wit, so I will now cast about to compass his destruction by my
contrivance and by mine intelligence; even as he took counsel only of
his malice and his frowardness."[FN#74] He began by asking the Ifrit,
"Hast thou indeed resolved to kill me?" and, receiving for all answer,
"Even so," he cried, "Now in the Most Great Name, graven on the seal
ring of Sulayman the Son of David (peace be with the holy twain!), an I
question thee on a certain matter wilt thou give me a true answer?" The
Ifrit replied "Yea;" but, hearing mention of the Most Great Name, his
wits were troubled and he said with trembling, "Ask and be brief."
Quoth the Fisherman, "How didst thou fit into this bottle which would
not hold thy hand; no, nor even thy foot, and how came it to be large
enough to contain the whole of thee?" Replied the Ifrit, "What! dost
not believe that I was all there?" and the Fisherman rejoined, "Nay! I
will never believe it until I see thee inside with my own eyes." And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

When it was the Fourth Night,


Her sister said to her, "Please finish us this tale, an thou be not
sleepy!" so she resumed:—It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the Fisherman said to the Ifrit, "I will never and nowise believe
thee until I see thee inside it with mine own eyes;" the Evil Spirit on
the instant shook[FN#75] and became a vapour, which condensed, and
entered the jar little and little, till all was well inside when lo!
the Fisherman in hot haste took the leaden cap with the seal and
stoppered therewith the mouth of the jar and called out to the Ifrit,
saying, "Ask me by way of boon what death thou wilt die! By Allah, I
will throw thee into the sea[FN#76] before us and here will I build me
a lodge; and whoso cometh hither I will warn him against fishing and
will say:—In these waters abideth an Ifrit who giveth as a last favour
a choice of deaths and fashion of slaughter to the man who saveth him!"
Now when the Ifrit heard this from the Fisherman and saw him self in
limbo, he was minded to escape, but this was prevented by Solomon's
seal; so he knew that the Fisherman had cozened and outwitted him, and
he waxed lowly and submissive and began humbly to say, "I did but jest
with thee." But the other answered, "Thou liest, O vilest of the
Ifrits, and meanest and filthiest!" and he set off with the bottle for
the sea side; the Ifrit calling out "Nay! Nay!" and he calling out
"Aye! Aye !" There upon the Evil Spirit softened his voice and smoothed
his speech and abased himself, saying, "What wouldest thou do with me,
O Fisherman?" "I will throw thee back into the sea," he answered;
"where thou hast been housed and homed for a thousand and eight hundred
years; and now I will leave thee therein till Judgment day: did I not
say to thee:—Spare me and Allah shall spare thee; and slay me not lest
Allah slay thee? yet thou spurnedst my supplication and hadst no
intention save to deal ungraciously by me, and Allah hath now thrown
thee into my hands and I am cunninger than thou." Quoth the Ifrit,
"Open for me and I may bring thee weal." Quoth the Fisherman, "Thou
liest, thou accursed! my case with thee is that of the Wazir of King
Yunan with the sage Duban."[FN#77] "And who was the Wazir of King Yunan
and who was the sage Duban; and what was the story about them?" quoth
the Ifrit, whereupon the Fisherman began to tell