story of me and this gazelle and thou shouldst consider it wondrous
wouldst thou give me a third part of this merchant's blood?" Then quoth
the Jinni "Even so, O Shaykh ! if thou tell me this tale, and I hold it
a marvellous, then will I give thee a third of his blood." Thereupon
the old man began to tell


The First Shaykh’s Story.


Know O Jinni! that this gazelle is the daughter of my paternal uncle,
my own flesh and blood, and I married her when she was a young maid,
and I lived with her well nigh thirty years, yet was I not blessed with
issue by her. So I took me a concubine[FN#45] who brought to me the
boon of a male child fair as the full moon, with eyes of lovely shine
and eyebrows which formed one line, and limbs of perfect design. Little
by little he grew in stature and waxed tall; and when he was a lad
fifteen years old, it became needful I should journey to certain cities
and I travelled with great store of goods. But the daughter of my uncle
(this gazelle) had learned gramarye and egromancy and clerkly
craft[FN#46] from her childhood; so she bewitched that son of mine to a
calf, and my handmaid (his mother) to a heifer, and made them over to
the herdsman's care. Now when I returned after a long time from my
journey and asked for my son and his mother, she answered me, saying
"Thy slave girl is dead, and thy son hath fled and I know not whither
he is sped." So I remained for a whole year with grieving heart, and
streaming eyes until the time came for the Great Festival of
Allah.[FN#47] Then sent I to my herdsman bidding him choose for me a
fat heifer; and he brought me one which was the damsel, my handmaid,
whom this gazelle had ensorcelled. I tucked up my sleeves and skirt
and, taking a knife, proceeded to cut her throat, but she lowed aloud
and wept bitter tears. Thereat I marvelled and pity seized me and I
held my hand, saying to the herd, "Bring me other than this." Then
cried my cousin, "Slay her, for I have not a fatter nor a fairer!" Once
more I went forward to sacrifice her, but she again lowed aloud upon
which in ruth I refrained and commanded the herdsman to slay her and
flay her. He killed her and skinned her but found in her neither fat
nor flesh, only hide and bone; and I repented when penitence availed me
naught. I gave her to the herdsman and said to him, "Fetch me a fat
calf;" so he brought my son ensorcelled. When the calf saw me, he brake
his tether and ran to me, and fawned upon me and wailed and shed tears;
so that I took pity on him and said to the herdsman, "Bring me a heifer
and let this calf go!" Thereupon my cousin (this gazelle) called aloud
at me, saying, "Needs must thou kill this calf; this is a holy day and
a blessed, whereon naught is slain save what be perfect pure; and we
have not amongst our calves any fatter or fairer than this!" Quoth I,
"Look thou upon the condition of the heifer which I slaughtered at thy
bidding and how we turn from her in disappointment and she profited us
on no wise; and I repent with an exceeding repentance of having killed
her: so this time I will not obey thy bidding for the sacrifice of this
calf." Quoth she, "By Allah the Most Great, the Compassionating, the
Compassionate! there is no help for it; thou must kill him on this holy
day, and if thou kill him not to me thou art no man and I to thee am no
wife." Now when I heard those hard words, not knowing her object I went
up to the calf, knife in hand—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.[FN#48] Then quoth her sister to
her, "How fair is thy tale, and how grateful, and how sweet and how
tasteful!" And Shahrazad answered her, "What is this to that I could
tell thee on the coming night, were I to live and the King would spare
me?" Then said the King in himself, "By Allah, I will not slay her,
until I shall have heard the rest of her tale." So they slept the rest
of that night in mutual embrace till day fully brake. Then the King
went forth to his audience hall[FN#49] and the Wazir went up with his
daughter's shroud under his arm. The King issued his orders, and
promoted this and deposed that, until the end of the day; and he told
the Wazir no whit of what had happened. But the Minister wondered
thereat with exceeding wonder; and when the Court broke up King
Shahryar entered his palace.

When it was the Second Night,


said Dunyazad to her sister Shahrazad, "O my sister, finish for us that