story of the Hunchback, I will pardon you all your offences." Thereupon
the man came forward and began to tell the


Tale of the Tailor.


Know, O King of the age, that most marvellous was that which befell me
but yesterday, before I foregathered with the Hunch back. It so chanced
that in the early day I was at the marriage feast of one of my
companions, who had gotten together in his house some twenty of the
handicraftsmen of this city, amongst them tailors and silk spinners and
carpenters and others of the same kidney. As soon as the sun had risen,
they set food[FN#601] before us that we might eat when behold, the
master of the house entered, and with him a foreign youth and a well
favoured of the people of Baghdad, wearing clothes as handsome as
handsome could be; and he was of right comely presence save that he was
lame of one leg. He came and saluted us and we stood up to receive him;
but when he was about to sit down he espied amongst us a certain man
which was a Barber; whereupon he refused to be seated and would have
gone away. But we stopped him and our host also stayed him, making oath
that he should not leave us and asked him, "What is the reason of thy
coming in and going out again at once?"; whereto he answered, "By
Allah, O my lord, do not hinder me; for the cause of my turning back is
yon Barber of bad omen,[FN#602] yon black o'face, yon ne'er do well!"
When the housemaster heard these words he marvelled with extreme marvel
and said, "How cometh this young man, who haileth from Baghdad, to be
so troubled and perplexed about this Barber?" Then we looked at the
stranger and said, "Explain the cause of thine anger against the
Barber." "O fair company," quoth the youth, "there befell me a strange
adventure with this Barber in Baghdad (which is my native city); he was
the cause of the breaking of my leg and of my lameness, and I have
sworn never to sit in the same place with him, nor even tarry in any
town where he happens to abide; and I have bidden adieu to Baghdad and
travelled far from it and came to stay in this your city; yet I have
hardly passed one night before I meet him again. But not another day
shall go by ere I fare forth from here." Said we to him, "Allah upon
thee, tell us the tale;" and the youth replied (the Barber changing
colour from brown to yellow as he spoke): Know, O fair company, that my
father was one of the chief merchants of Baghdad, and Almighty Allah
had blessed him with no son but myself. When I grew up and reached
man's estate, my father was received into the mercy of Allah (whose
Name be exalted!) and left me money and eunuchs, servants and slaves;
and I used to dress well and diet well. Now Allah had made me a hater
of women kind and one day, as I was walking along a street in Baghdad,
a party of females met me face to face in the footway; so I fled from
them and, entering an alley which was no thoroughfare, sat down upon a
stone bench at its other end. I had not sat there long before the
latticed window of one of the houses opposite was thrown open, and
there appeared at it a young lady, as she were the full moon at its
fullest; never in my life saw I her like; and she began to water some
flowers on the window sill.[FN#603] She turned right and left and,
seeing me watching her, shut the window and went away. Thereupon fire
was suddenly enkindled in my heart; my mind was possessed with her and
my woman hate turned to woman love. I continued sitting there, lost to
the world, till sunset when lo! the Kazi of the city came riding by
with his slaves before him and his eunuchs behind him, and dismounting
entered the house in which the damsel had appeared. By this I knew that
he was her father; so I went home sorrowful and cast myself upon my
carpet bed in grief. Then my handmaids flocked in and sat about me,
unknowing what ailed me; but I addressed no speech to them, and they
wept and wailed over me. Presently in came an old woman who looked at
me and saw with a glance what was the matter with me: so she sat down
by my head and spoke me fair, saying, "O my son, tell me all about it
and I will be the means of thy union with her."[FN#604] So I related to
her what had happened and she answered, "O my son, this one is the
daughter of the Kazi of Baghdad who keepeth her in the closest
seclusion; and the window where thou sawest her is her floor, whilst
her father occupies the large saloon in the lower story. She is often
there alone and I am wont to visit at the house; so thou shalt not win
to her save through me. Now set thy wits to work and be of good cheer."
With these words she went away and I took heart at what she said and my
people rejoiced that day, seeing me rise in the morning safe and sound.
By and by the old woman returned looking chopfallen,[FN#605] and said,
"O my son, do not ask me how I fared with her! When I told her that,
she cried at me, 'If thou hold not thy peace, O hag of ill omen, and
leave not such talk, I will entreat thee as thou deservest and do thee
die by the foulest of deaths.' But needs must I have at her a second
time."[FN#606] When I heard this it added ailment to my ailment and the
neighbours visited me and judged that I was not long for this world;
but after some days, the old woman came to me and, putting her mouth
close to my ear, whispered, "O my son; I claim from thee the gift of
good news." With this my soul returned to me and I said, "Whatever thou
wilt shall be thine." Thereupon she began, "Yesterday I went to the
young lady who, seeing me broken in spirit and shedding tears from
reddened eyes, asked me, 'O naunty[FN#607] mine, what ails thee, that I
see thy breast so straitened?'; and I answered her, weeping bitterly,
'O my lady, I am just come from the house of a youth who loves thee and
who is about to die for sake of thee!' Quoth she (and her heart was
softened), 'And who is this youth of whom thou speakest?'; and quoth I,
'He is to me as a son and the fruit of my vitals. He saw thee, some
days ago, at the window watering thy flowers and espying thy face and
wrists he fell in love at first sight. I let him know what happened to
me the last time I was with thee, whereupon his ailment increased, he
took to the pillow and he is naught now but a dead man, and no doubt
what ever of it.' At this she turned pale and asked, 'All this for my
sake?'; and I answered, 'Ay, by Allah![FN#608] what wouldst thou have
me do?' Said she, 'Go back to him and greet him for me and tell him
that I am twice more heartsick than he is. And on Friday, before the
hour of public prayer, bid him here to the house, and I will come down
and open the door for him. Then I will carry him up to my chamber and
foregather with him for a while, and let him depart before my father
return from the Mosque.'" When I heard the old woman's words, all my
sickness suddenly fell from me, my anguish ceased and my heart was
comforted; I took off what clothes were on me and gave them to her and,
as she turned to go, she said, "Keep a good heart!" "I have not a jot
of sorrow left." I replied. My household and intimates rejoiced in my
recovery and I abode thus till Friday, when behold, the old woman came
in and asked me how I did, to which I answered that I was well and in
good case. Then I donned my clothes and perfumed myself and sat down to
await the congregation going in to prayers, that I might betake myself
to her. But the old woman said to me, "Thou hast time and to spare: so
thou wouldst do well to go to the Hammam and have thy hair shaven off
(especially after thy ailment), so as not to show traces of sickness."
"This were the best way," answered I, "I have just now bathed in hot
water, but I will have my head shaved." Then I said to my page, "Go to
the bazar and bring me a barber, a discreet fellow and one not inclined
to meddling or impertinent curiosity or likely to split my head with
his excessive talk."[FN#609] The boy went out at once and brought back
with him this wretched old man, this Shaykh of ill omen. When he came
in he saluted me and I returned his salutation; then quoth he, "Of a
truth I see thee thin of body;" and quoth I, "I have been ailing." He
continued, "Allah drive far away from thee thy woe and thy sorrow and
thy trouble and thy distress." "Allah grant thy prayer!" said I. He
pursued, "All gladness to thee, O my master, for indeed recovery is
come to thee. Dost thou wish to be polled or to be blooded? Indeed it
was a tradition of Ibn Abbas[FN#610] (Allah accept of him!) that the
Apostle said, 'Whoso cutteth his hair on a Friday, the Lord shall avert
from him threescore and ten calamities;' and again is related of him
also that he said, 'Cupping on a Friday keepeth from loss of sight and
a host of diseases.'" "Leave this talk," I cried; "come, shave me my
head at once for I can't stand it." So he rose and put forth his hand
in most leisurely way and took out a kerchief and unfolded it, and lo!
it contained an astrolabe[FN#611] with seven parallel plates mounted in
silver. Then he went to the middle of the court and raised head and
instrument towards the sun's rays and looked for a long while. When
this was over, he came back and said to me, "Know that there have
elapsed of this our day, which be Friday, and this Friday be the tenth
of the month Safar in the six hundred and fifty-third year since the
Hegira or Flight of the Apostle (on whom be the bestest of blessings
and peace!) and the seven thousand three hundred and twentieth year of
the era of Alexander, eight degrees and six minutes. Furthermore the
ascendant of this our day is, according to the exactest science of
computation, the planet Mars; and it so happeneth that Mercury is in
conjunction with him, denoting an auspicious moment for hair cutting;
and this also maketh manifest to me that thou desires union with a
certain person and that your intercourse will not be propitious. But
after this there occurreth a sign respecting a matter which will befall
thee and whereof I will not speak." "O thou," cried I, "by Allah, thou
weariest me and scatterest my wits and thy forecast is other than good;
I sent for thee to poll my head and naught else: so up and shave me and
prolong not thy speech." "By Allah," replied he, "if thou but knew what
is about to befall thee, thou wouldst do nothing this day, and I
counsel thee to act as I tell thee by computation of the
constellations." "By Allah," said I, "never did I see a barber who
excelled in judicial astrology save thyself: but I think and I know
that thou art most prodigal of frivolous talk. I sent for thee only to
shave my head, but thou comest and pesterest me with this sorry
prattle." "What more wouldst thou have?" replied he. "Allah hath
bounteously bestowed on thee a Barber who is an astrologer, one learned
in alchemy and white magic;[FN#612] syntax, grammar, and lexicology;
the arts of logic, rhetoric and elocution; mathematics, arithmetic and
algebra; astronomy, astromancy and geometry; theology, the Traditions
of the Apostle and the Commentaries on the Koran. Furthermore, I have
read books galore and digested them and have had experience of affairs
and comprehended them. In short I have learned the theorick and the
practick of all the arts and sciences; I know everything of them by
rote and I am a past master in tota re scibili. Thy father loved me for
my lack of officiousness, argal, to serve thee is a religious duty
incumbent on me. I am no busy body as thou seemest to suppose, and on
this account I am known as The Silent Man, also, The Modest Man.
Wherefore it behoveth thee to render thanks to Allah Almighty and not
cross me, for I am a true counsellor to thee and benevolently minded
towards thee. Would that I were in thy service a whole year that thou
mightest do me justice; and I would ask thee no wage for all this."
When I heard his flow of words, I said to him, "Doubtless thou wilt be
my death this day!"—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

When it was the Thirtieth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young man
said to the Barber, "Thou certainly wilt be the death of me this very
day!" "O master mine," replied he, "I am he, The Silent Man hight, by
reason of the fewness of my words, to distinguish me from my six
brothers. For the eldest is called Al-Bakbúk, the prattler; the second
Al-Haddár, the babbler; the third Al-Fakík, the gabbler; the fourth,
his name is Al-Kuz al-aswáni, the long necked Gugglet, from his eternal
chattering; the fifth is Al-Nashshár, the tattler and tale teller; the
sixth Shakáshik, or many clamours; and the seventh is famous as
Al-Sámit, The Silent Man, and this is my noble self!" Whilst he
redoubled his talk, I thought my gall bladder would have burst; so I
said to the servant, "Give him a quarter dinar and dismiss him and let
him go from me in the name of God who made him. I won't have my head
shaved to day." "What words be these, O my lord?" cried he. "By Allah!
I will accept no hire of thee till I have served thee and have
ministered to thy wants; and I care not if I never take money of thee.
If thou know not my quality, I know thine; and I owe thy father, an
honest man, on whom Allah Almighty have mercy! many a kindness, for he
was a liberal soul and a generous. By Allah, he sent for me one day, as
it were this blessed day, and I went in to him and found a party of his
intimates about him. Quoth he to me, 'Let me blood;' so I pulled out my
astrolabe and, taking the sun's altitude for him, I ascertained that
the ascendant was inauspicious and the hour unfavourable for blooding.
I told him of this, and he did according to my bidding and awaited a
better opportunity. So I made these lines in honour of him:—

I went to my patron some blood to let him, * But found that the moment
was far from good:
So I sat and I talked of all strangenesses, * And with jests and jokes
his good will I wooed:
They pleased him and cried he, 'O man of wit, * Thou hast proved thee
perfect in merry mood!'
Quoth I, 'O thou Lord of men, save thou * Lend me art and wisdom I'm
fou and wood
In thee gather grace, boon, bounty, suavity, * And I guerdon the world
with lore, science and gravity.'


Thy father was delighted and cried out to the servant, 'Give him an
hundred and three gold pieces with a robe of honour!' The man obeyed
his orders, and I awaited an auspicious moment, when I blooded him; and
he did not baulk me; nay he thanked me and I was also thanked and
praised by all present. When the blood-letting was over I had no power
to keep silence and asked him, 'By Allah, O my lord, what made thee say
to the servant, Give him an hundred and three dinars?'; and he
answered, 'One dinar was for the astrological observation, another for
thy pleasant conversation, the third for the phlebotomisation, and the
remaining hundred and the dress were for thy verses in my
commendation.'" "May Allah show small mercy to my father," exclaimed I,
"for knowing the like of thee." He laughed and ejaculated, "There is no
god but the God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God! Glory to Him that
changeth and is changed not! I took thee for a man of sense, but I see
thou babblest and dotest for illness. Allah hath said in the Blessed
Book,[FN#613] 'Paradise is prepared for the goodly who bridle their
anger and forgive men.' and so forth; and in any case thou art excused.
Yet I cannot conceive the cause of thy hurry and flurry; and thou must
know that thy father and thy grandfather did nothing without consulting
me, and indeed it hath been said truly enough, 'Let the adviser be
prized'; and, 'There is no vice in advice'; and it is also said in
certain saws, 'Whoso hath no counsellor elder than he, will never
himself an elder be';[FN#614] and the poet says:—

Whatever needful thing thou undertake, * Consult th' experienced and
contraire him not!


And indeed thou shalt never find a man better versed in affairs than I,
and I am here standing on my feet to serve thee. I am not vexed with
thee: why shouldest thou be vexed with me? But whatever happen I will
bear patiently with thee in memory of the much kindness thy father
shewed me." "By Allah," cried I, "O thou with tongue long as the tail
of a jackass, thou persistest in pestering me with thy prate and thou
becomest more longsome in thy long speeches, when all I want of thee is
to shave my head and wend thy way!" Then he lathered my head saying, "I
perceive thou art vexed with me, but I will not take it ill of thee,
for thy wit is weak and thou art but a laddy: it was only yesterday I
used to take thee on my shoulder[FN#615] and carry thee to school.' "O
my brother," said I, "for Allah's sake do what I want and go thy gait!"
And I rent my garments.[FN#616] When he saw me do this he took the
razor and fell to sharpening it and gave not over stropping it until my
senses were well nigh leaving me. Then he came up to me and shaved part
of my head; then he held his hand and then he said, "O my lord, haste
is Satan's gait whilst patience is of Allah the Compassionate. But
thou, O my master, I ken thou knowest not my rank; for verily this hand
alighteth upon the heads of Kings and Emirs and Wazirs, and sages and
doctors learned in the law, and the poet said of one like me:—

All crafts are like necklaces strung on a string, * But this Barber's
the union pearl of the band:
High over all craftsmen he ranketh, and why? * The heads of the Kings
are under his hand!"[FN#617]


Then said I, "Do leave off talking about what concerneth thee not:
indeed thou hast straitened my breast and distracted my mind." Quoth
he, "Meseems thou art a hasty man;" and quoth I, "Yes ! yes! yes!" and
he, "I rede thee practice restraint of self, for haste is Satan's pelf
which bequeatheth only repentance and ban and bane, and He (upon whom
be blessings and peace!) hath said, 'The best of works is that wherein
deliberation lurks;' but I, by Allah! have some doubt about thine
affair; and so I should like thee to let me know what it is thou art in
such haste to do, for I fear me it is other than good." Then he
continued, "It wanteth three hours yet to prayer time; but I do not
wish to be in doubt upon this matter; nay, I must know the moment
exactly, for truly, 'A guess shot in times of doubt, oft brings harm
about;' especially in the like of me, a superior person whose merits
are famous amongst mankind at large; and it doth not befit me to talk
at random, as do the common sort of astrologers." So saying, he threw
down the razor and taking up the astrolabe, went forth under the sun
and stood there a long time; after which he returned and counting on
his fingers said to me, "There remain still to prayer time three full
hours and complete, neither more nor yet less, according to the most
learned astronomicals and the wisest makers of almanacks." "Allah upon
thee," cried I, "hold thy tongue with me, for thou breakest my liver in
pieces." So he took the razor and, after sharpening it as before and
shaving other two hairs of my head, he again held his hand and said, "I
am concerned about thy hastiness and indeed thou wouldst do well to let
me into the cause of it; 't were the better for thee, as thou knowest
that neither thy father nor thy grandfather ever did a single thing
save by my advice." When I saw that there was no escape from him I said
to myself, "The time for prayer draws near and I wish to go to her
before the folk come out of the mosque. If I am delayed much longer, I
know not how to come at her." Then said I aloud, "Be quick and stint
this talk and impertinence, for I have to go to a party at the house of
some of my intimates." When he heard me speak of the party, he said,
"This thy day is a blessed day for me! In very sooth it was but
yesterday I invited a company of my friends and I have forgotten to
provide anything for them to eat. This very moment I was thinking of
it: Alas, how I shall be disgraced in their eyes!" "Be not distressed
about this matter," answered I; "have I not told thee that I am bidden
to an entertainment this day? So every thing in my house, eatable and
drinkable, shall be thine, if thou wilt only get through thy work and
make haste to shave my head." He replied, "Allah requite thee with
good! Specify to me what is in thy house for my guests that I may be
ware of it." Quoth I, "Five dishes of meat and ten chickens with
reddened breasts[FN#618] and a roasted lamb." "Set them before me,"
quoth he "that I may see them." So I told my people to buy, borrow or
steal them and bring them in anywise, And had all this set before him.
When he saw it he cried, "The wine is wanting," and I replied, "I have
a flagon or two of good old grape-juice in the house," and he said,
"Have it brought out!" So I sent for it and he exclaimed, "Allah bless
thee for a generous disposition! But there are still the essences and
perfumes." So I bade them set before him a box containing Nadd,[FN#619]
the best of compound perfumes, together with fine lign-aloes, ambergris
and musk unmixed, the whole worth fifty dinars. Now the time waxed
strait and my heart straitened with it; so I said to him, "Take it all
and finish shaving my head by the life of Mohammed (whom Allah bless
and keep!)." "By Allah," said he, "I will not take it till I see all
that is in it." So I bade the page open the box and the Barber laid
down the astrolabe, leaving the greater part of my head unpolled; and,
sitting on the ground, turned over the scents and incense and aloes
wood and essences till I was well nigh distraught. Then he took the
razor and coming up to me shaved off some few hairs and repeated these
lines:—

"The boy like his father shall surely show, * As the tree from its
parent root shall grow."[FN#620]


Then said he, "By Allah, O my son, I know not whether to thank thee or
thy father; for my entertainment this day is all due to thy bounty and
beneficence; and, although none of my company be worthy of it, yet I
have a set of honourable men, to wit Zantut the bath-keeper and Sali'a
the corn-chandler; and Silat the bean-seller; and Akrashah the
greengrocer; and Humayd the scavenger; and Sa'id the camel-man; and
Suwayd the porter; and Abu Makarish the bathman;[FN#621] and Kasim the
watchman; and Karim the groom. There is not among the whole of them a
bore or a bully in his cups; nor a meddler nor a miser of his money,
and each and every hath some dance which he danceth and some of his own
couplets which he caroleth; and the best of them is that, like thy
servant, thy slave here, they know not what much talking is nor what
forwardness means. The bath keeper sings to the tom-tom[FN#622] a song
which enchants; and he stands up and dances and chants,

'I am going, O mammy, to fill up my pot.'


As for the corn-chandler he brings more skill to it than any; he dances
and sings,

'O Keener,[FN#623] O sweetheart, thou fallest not short'


and he leaves no one's vitals sound for laughing at him. But the
scavenger sings so that the birds stop to listen to him and dances and
sings,

'News my wife wots is not locked in a box!'[FN#624]


And he hath privilege, for 'tis a shrewd rogue[FN#625] and a witty; and
speaking of his excellence I am wont to say,

My life for the scavenger! right well I love him, * Like a waving bough
he is sweet to my sight:
Fate joined us one night, when to him quoth I * (The while I grew weak
and love gained more might)
'Thy love burns my heart!' 'And no wonder,' quoth he * 'When the drawer
of dung turns a stoker wight.'[FN#626]


And indeed each is perfect in whatso can charm the wit with joy and
jollity;" adding presently, "But hearing is not seeing; and indeed if
thou make up thy mind to join us and put off going to thy friends,
'twill be better for us and for thee. The traces of illness are yet
upon thee and haply thou art going among folk who be mighty talkers,
men who commune together of what concerneth them not; or there may be
amongst them some forward fellow who will split thy head, and thou half
thy size from sickness." "This shall be for some other day," answered
I, and laughed with heart angered: "finish thy work and go, in Allah
Almighty's guard, to thy friends, for they will be expecting thy
coming." "O my lord," replied he, "I seek only to introduce thee to
these fellows of infinite mirth, the sons of men of worth, amongst whom
there is neither procacity nor dicacity nor loquacity; for never, since
I grew to years of discretion, could I endure to consort with one who
asketh questions concerning what concerneth him not, nor have I ever
frequented any save those who are, like myself, men of few words. In
sooth if thou were to company with them or even to see them once, thou
wouldst forsake all thy intimates." "Allah fulfil thy joyance with
them," said I, "needs must I come amongst them some day or other." But
he said, "Would it were this very day, for I had set my heart upon thy
making one of us; yet if thou must go to thy friends to day, I will
take these good things, wherewith thou hast honoured and favoured me,
to my guests and leave them to eat and drink and not wait for me;
whilst I will return to thee in haste and accompany thee to thy little
party; for there is no ceremony between me and my intimates to prevent
my leaving them. Fear not, I will soon be back with thee and wend with
thee whithersoever thou wendest. There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" I shouted, "Go thou to
thy friends and make merry with them; and do let me go to mine and be
with them this day, for they expect me." But the Barber cried, "I will
not let thee go alone;" and I replied, "The truth is none can enter
where I am going save myself." He rejoined, "I suspect that to day thou
art for an assignation with some woman, else thou hadst taken me with
thee; yet am I the right man to take, one who could aid thee to the end
thou wishest. But I fear me thou art running after strange women and
thou wilt lose thy life; for in this our city of Baghdad one cannot do
any thing in this line, especially on a day like Friday: our Governor
is an angry man and a mighty sharp blade." "Shame on thee, thou wicked,
bad, old man!" cried I, "Be off! what words are these thou givest me?"
"O cold of wit,"[FN#627] cried he, "thou sayest to me what is not true
and thou hidest thy mind from me, but I know the whole business for
certain and I seek only to help thee this day with my best endeavour."
I was fearful lest my people or my neighbours should hear the Barber's
talk, so I kept silence for a long time whilst he finished shaving my
head; by which time the hour of prayer was come and the Khutbah, or
sermon, was about to follow. When he had done, I said to him, "Go to
thy friends with their meat and drink, and I will await thy return.
Then we will fare together." In this way I hoped to pour oil on
troubled waters and to trick the accursed loon, so haply I might get
quit of him; but he said, "Thou art cozening me and thou wouldst go
alone to thy appointment and cast thyself into jeopardy, whence there
will be no escape for thee. Now by Allah! and again by Allah! do not go
till I return, that I may accompany thee and watch the issue of thine
affair." "So be it," I replied, "do not be long absent." Then he took
all the meat and drink I had given him and the rest of it and went out
of my house; but the accursed carle gave it in charge of a porter to
carry to his home but hid himself in one of the alleys. As for me I
rose on the instant, for the Muezzins had already called the Salam of
Friday, the salutation to the Apostle;[FN#628] and I dressed in haste
and went out alone and, hurrying to the street, took my stand by the
house wherein I had seen the young lady. I found the old woman on guard
at the door awaiting me, and went up with her to the upper story, the
damsel's apartment. Hardly had I reached it when behold, the master of
the house returned from prayers and entering the great saloon, closed
the door. I looked down from the window and saw this Barber (Allah's
curse upon him!) sitting over against the door and said, "How did this
devil find me out?" At this very moment, as Allah had decreed it for
rending my veil of secrecy, it so happened that a handmaid of the house
master committed some offence for which he beat her. She shrieked out
and his slave ran in to intercede for her, whereupon the Kazi beat him
to boot, and he also roared out. The damned Barber fancied that it was
I who was being beaten; so he also fell to shouting and tore his
garments and scattered dust on his head and kept on shrieking and
crying "Help ! Help !" So the people came round about him and he went
on yelling, "My master is being murdered in the Kazi's house!" Then he
ran clamouring to my place with the folk after him, and told my people
and servants and slaves; and, before I knew what was doing, up they
came tearing their clothes and letting loose their hair[FN#629] and
shouting, "Alas, our master!"; and this Barber leading the rout with
his clothes rent and in sorriest plight; and he also shouting like a
madman and saying, "Alas for our murdered master!" And they all made an
assault upon the house in which I was. The Kazi, hearing the yells and
the uproar at his door, said to one of his servants, "See what is the
matter"; and the man went forth and returned and said, "O my master, at
the gate there are more than ten thousand souls what with men and
women, and all crying out, 'Alas for our murdered master!'; and they
keep pointing to our house." When the Kazi heard this, the matter
seemed serious and he waxed wroth; so he rose and opening the door saw
a great crowd of people; whereat he was astounded and said, "O folk!
what is there to do?" "O accursed! O dog! O hog!" my servants replied;
"'Tis thou who hast killed our master!" Quoth he, "O good folk, and
what hath your master done to me that I should kill him?"— And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
say.

When it was the Thirty-first Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kazi said to
the servants, "What hath your master done to me that I should kill him?
This is my house and it is open to you all." Then quoth the Barber,
"Thou didst beat him and I heard him cry out;" and quoth the Kazi, "But
what was he doing that I should beat him, and what brought him in to my
house; and whence came he and whither went he?" "Be not a wicked,
perverse old man!" cried the Barber, "for I know the whole story; and
the long and short of it is that thy daughter is in love with him and
he loves her; and when thou knewest that he had entered the house, thou
badest thy servants beat him and they did so: by Allah, none shall
judge between us and thee but the Caliph; or else do thou bring out our
master that his folk may take him, before they go in and save him
perforce from thy house, and thou be put to shame." Then said the Kazi
(and his tongue was bridled and his mouth was stopped by confusion
before the people), "An thou say sooth, do thou come in and fetch him
out." Whereupon the Barber pushed forward and entered the house. When I
saw this I looked about for a means of escape and flight, but saw no
hiding place except a great chest in the upper chamber where I was. So
I got into it and pulled the lid down upon myself and held my breath.
The Barber was hardly in the room before he began to look about for me,
then turned him right and left and came straight to the place where I
was, and stepped up to the chest and, lifting it on his head, made off
as fast as he could. At this, my reason forsook me, for I knew that he
would not let me be; so I took courage and opening the chest threw
myself to the ground. My leg was broken in the fall, and the door being
open I saw a great concourse of people looking in. Now I carried in my
sleeve much gold and some silver, which I had provided for an ill day
like this and the like of such occasion; so I kept scattering it
amongst the folk to divert their attention from me and, whilst they
were busy scrambling for it, I set off, hopping as fast as I could,
through the by streets of Baghdad, shifting and turning right and left.
But whithersoever I went this damned Barber would go in after me,
crying aloud, "They would have bereft me of my maa-a-ster! They would
have slain him who was a benefactor to me and my family and my friends!
Praised be Allah who made me prevail against them and delivered my lord
from their hands!" Then to me, "Where wilt thou go now? Thou wouldst
persist in following thine own evil devices, till thou broughtest
thyself to this ill pass; and, had not Allah vouchsafed me to thee,
ne'er hadst thou escaped this strait into which thou hast fallen, for
they would have cast thee into a calamity whence thou never couldest
have won free. But I will not call thee to account for thine ignorance,
as thou art so little of wit and inconsequential and addicted to
hastiness!" Said I to him, "Doth not what thou hast brought upon me
suffice thee, but thou must run after me and talk me such talk in the
bazar streets?" And I well nigh gave up the ghost for excess of rage
against him. Then I took refuge in the shop of a weaver amiddlemost of
the market and sought protection of the owner who drove the Barber
away; and, sitting in the back room,[FN#630] I said to myself, "If I
return home I shall never be able to get rid of this curse of a Barber,
who will be with me night and day; and I cannot endure the sight of him
even for a breathing space." So I sent out at once for witnesses and
made a will, dividing the greater part of my property among my people,
and appointed a guardian over them, to whom I committed the charge of
great and small, directing him to sell my houses and domains. Then I
set out on my travels that I might be free of this pimp;[FN#631] and I
came to settle in your town where I have lived some time. When you
invited me and I came hither, the first thing I saw was this accursed
pander seated in the place of honour. How then can my heart be glad and
my stay be pleasant in company with this fellow who brought all this
upon me, and who was the cause of the breaking of my leg and of my
exile from home and native land. And the youth refused to sit down and
went away. When we heard his story (continued the Tailor) we were
amazed beyond measure and amused and said to the Barber, "By Allah, is
it true what this young man saith of thee?" "By Allah," replied he, "I
dealt thus by him of my courtesy and sound sense and generosity. Had it
not been for me he had perished and none but I was the cause of his
escape. Well it was for him that he suffered in his leg and not in his
life! Had I been a man of many words, a meddler, a busy body, I had not
acted thus kindly by him; but now I will tell you a tale which befell
me, that you may be well assured I am a man sparing of speech in whom
is no forwardness and a very different person from those six Brothers
of mine; and this it is."


The Barber’s Tale of Himself.


I was living in Baghdad during the times of Al-Mustansir
bi'llah,[FN#632] Son of Al-Mustazi bi'llah the then Caliph, a prince
who loved the poor and needy and companied with the learned and pious.
One day it happened to him that he was wroth with ten persons,
highwaymen who robbed on the Caliph's highway, and he ordered the
Prefect of Baghdad to bring them into the presence on the anniversary
of the Great Festival.[FN#633] So the Prefect sallied out and, making
them His prisoners, embarked with them in a boat. I caught sight of
them as they were embarking and said to myself, "These are surely
assembled for a marriage feast; methinks they are spending their day in
that boat eating and drinking, and none shall be companion of their
cups but I myself." So I rose, O fair assembly; and, of the excess of
my courtesy and the gravity of my understanding, I embarked with them
and entered into conversation with them. They rowed across to the
opposite bank, where they landed and there came up the watch and
guardians of the peace with chains, which they put round the robbers'
necks. They chained me among the rest of them; and, O people, is it not
a proof of my courtesy and spareness of speech, that I held my peace
and did not please to speak? Then they took us away in bilbos and next
morning carried us all before Al-Mustansir bi'llah, Commander of the
Faithful, who bade smite the necks of the ten robbers. So the Sworder
came forward after they were seated on the leather of blood;[FN#634]
then drawing his blade, struck off one head after another until he had
smitten the neck of the tenth; and I alone remained. The Caliph looked
at me and asked the Heads man, saying, "What ails thee that thou hast
struck off only nine heads?"; and he answered, "Allah forbid that I
should behead only nine, when thou biddest me behead ten!" Quoth the
Caliph, "Meseems thou hast smitten the necks of only nine, and this man
before thee is the tenth." "By thy beneficence!" replied the Headsman,
"I have beheaded ten." "Count them!" cried the Caliph and whenas they
counted heads, lo! there were ten. The Caliph looked at me and said,
"What made thee keep silence at a time like this and how camest thou to
company with these men of blood? Tell me the cause of all this, for
albeit thou art a very old man, assuredly thy wits are weak." Now when
I heard these words from the Caliph I sprang to my feet and replied,
"Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am the Silent Shaykh and am
thus called to distinguish me from my six brothers. I am a man of
immense learning whilst, as for the gravity of my understanding, the
wiliness of my wits and the spareness of my speech, there is no end of
them; and my calling is that of a barber. I went out early on yesterday
morning and saw these men making for a skiff; and, fancying they were
bound for a marriage feast, I joined them and mixed with them. After a
while up came the watch and guardians of the peace, who put chains
round their necks and round mine with the rest; but, in the excess of
my courtesy, I held my peace and spake not a word; nor was this other
but generosity on my part. They brought us into thy presence, and thou
gavest an order to smite the necks of the ten; yet did I not make
myself known to thee and remained silent before the Sworder, purely of
my great generosity and courtesy which led me to share with them in
their death. But all my life long have I dealt thus nobly with mankind,
and they requite me the foulest and evillest requital!" When the Caliph
heard my words and knew that I was a man of exceeding generosity and of
very few words, one in whom is no forwardness (as this youth would have
it whom I rescued from mortal risk and who hath so scurvily repaid me),
he laughed with excessive laughter till he fell upon his back. Then
said he to me, "O Silent Man, do thy six brothers favour thee in wisdom
and knowledge and spareness of speech?" I replied, "Never were they
like me! Thou puttest reproach upon me, O Commander of the Faithful,
and it becomes thee not to even my brothers with me; for, of the
abundance of their speech and their deficiency of courtesy and gravity,
each one of them hath gotten some maim or other. One is a monocular,
another palsied, a third stone blind, a fourth cropped of ears and nose
and a fifth shorn of both lips, while the sixth is a hunchback and a
cripple. And conceive not, O Commander of the Faithful, that I am
prodigal of speech; but I must perforce explain to thee that I am a man
of greater worth and fewer words than any of them. From each one of my
brothers hangs a tale of how he came by his bodily defect and these I
will relate to thee." So the Caliph gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his First Brother.


Know then, O Commander of the Faithful, that my first brother, Al
Bakbuk, the Prattler, is a Hunchback who took to tailoring in Baghdad,
and he used to sew in a shop hired from a man of much wealth, who dwelt
over the shop,[FN#635] and there was also a flour-mill in the basement.
One day as my brother, the Hunchback, was sitting in his shop a
tailoring, he chanced to raise his head and saw a lady like the rising
full moon at a balconied window of his landlord's house, engaged in
looking out at the passers by.[FN#636] When my brother beheld her, his
heart was taken with love of her and he passed his whole day gazing at
her and neglected his tailoring till eventide. Next morning he opened
his shop and sat him down to sew; but, as often as he stitched a
stitch, he looked to the window and saw her as before; and his passion
and infatuation for her increased. On the third day as he was sitting
in his usual place gazing on her, she caught sight of him and,
perceiving that he had been captivated with love of her, laughed in his
face[FN#637] and he smiled back at her. Then she disappeared and
presently sent her slave girl to him with a bundle containing a piece
of red flowered silk. The handmaid accosted him and said, "My lady
salameth to thee and desireth thee, of thy skill and good will, to
fashion for her a shift of this piece and to sew it handsomely with thy
best sewing. He replied, "Hearkening and obedience"; and shaped for her
a chemise and finished sewing it the same day. When the morning
morrowed the girl came back and said to him, "My lady salameth to thee
and asks how thou hast passed yesternight; for she hath not tasted
sleep by reason of her heart being taken up with thee. Then she laid
before him a piece of yellow satin and said, My lady biddeth thee cut
her two pair of petticoat trousers out of this piece and sew them this
very day." "Hearkening and obedience!' replied he, "greet her for me
with many greetings and say to her, Thy slave is obedient to thine
order; so command him as thou wilt." Then he applied himself to cutting
out and worked hard at sewing the trousers; and after an hour the lady
appeared at the lattice and saluted him by signs, now casting down her
eyes, then smiling in his face, and he began to assure himself that he
would soon make a conquest. She did not let him stir till he had
finished the two pair of trousers, when she with drew and sent the
handmaid to whom he delivered them; and she took them and went her
ways. When it was night, he threw himself on his carpet bed, and lay
tossing about from side to side till morning, when he rose and sat down
in his place. Presently the damsel came to him and said, "My master
calleth for thee." Hearing these words he feared with exceeding fear;
but the slave girl, seeing his affright, said to him, "No evil is meant
to thee: naught but good awaiteth thee. My lady would have thee make
acquaintance with my lord." So my brother the tailor, rejoicing with
great joy, went with her; and when he came into the presence of his
landlord, the lady's husband, he kissed the ground before him, and the
master of the house returned his greeting and gave him a great piece of
linen saying, "Shape me shirts out of this stuff and sew them well;"
and my brother answered, "To hear is to obey." Thereupon he fell to
work at once, snipping, shaping and sewing till he had finished twenty
shirts by supper time, without stopping to taste food. The house master
asked him, "How much the wage for this?"; and he answered, "Twenty
dirhams." So the gentleman cried out to the slave girl, "Bring me
twenty dirhams," and my brother spake not a word; but the lady signed,
"Take nothing from him;' whereupon my brother said, "By Allah I will
take naught from thy hand. And he carried off his tailor's gear and
returned to his shop, although he was destitute even to a red
cent.[FN#638] Then he applied himself to do their work; eating, in his
zeal and diligence, but a bit of bread and drinking only a little water
for three days. At the end of this time came the handmaid and said to
him, "What hast thou done?" Quoth he, "They are finished," and carried
the shirts to the lady's husband, who would have paid him his hire: but
he said, "I will take nothing," for fear of her and, returning to his
shop, passed the night without sleep because of his hunger. Now the
dame had informed her husband how the case stood (my brother knowing
naught of this); and the two had agreed to make him tailor for nothing,
the better to mock and laugh at him. Next morning he went to his shop,
and, as he sat there, the handmaid came to him and said, "Speak with my
master." So he accompanied her to the husband who said to him, "I wish
thee to cut out for me five long sleeved robes."[FN#639] So he cut them
out[FN#640] and took the stuff and went away. Then he sewed them and
carried them to the gentleman, who praised his sewing and offered him a
purse of silver. He put out his hand to take it, but the lady signed to
him from behind her husband not to do so, and he replied, "O my lord,
there is no hurry, we have time enough for this." Then he went forth
from the house meaner and meeker than a donkey, for verily five things
were gathered together in him viz.: love, beggary, hunger, nakedness
and hard labour. Nevertheless he heartened himself with the hope of
gaining the lady's favours. When he had made an end of all their jobs,
they played him another trick and married him to their slave girl; but,
on the night when he thought to go in to her, they said to him, "Lie
this night in the mill; and to morrow all will go well." My brother
concluded that there was some good cause for this and nighted alone in
the mill. Now the husband had set on the miller to make the tailor turn
the mill: so when night was half spent the man came in to him and began
to say, "This bull of ours hath be come useless and standeth still
instead of going round: he will not turn the mill this night, and yet
we have great store of corn to be ground. However, I'll yoke him
perforce and make him finish grinding it before morning, as the folk
are impatient for their flour." So he filled the hoppers with grain
and, going up to my brother with a rope in his hand, tied it round his
neck and said to him, "Gee up! Round with the mill! thou, O bull,
wouldst do nothing but grub and stale and dung!" Then he took a whip
and laid it on the shoulders and calves of my brother, who began to
howl and bellow; but none came to help him; and he was forced to grind
the wheat till hard upon dawn, when the house master came in and,
seeing my brother still tethered to the yoke and the man flogging him,
went away. At day break the miller returned home and left him still
yoked and half dead; and soon after in came the slave girl who unbound
him, and said to him, "I and my lady are right sorry for what hath
happened and we have borne thy grief with thee." But he had no tongue
wherewith to answer her from excess of beating and mill turning. Then
he retired to his lodging and behold, the clerk who had drawn up the
marriage deed came to him[FN#641] and saluted him, saying, "Allah give
thee long life! May thy espousal be blessed! This face telleth of
pleasant doings and dalliance and kissing and clipping from dusk to
dawn." "Allah grant the liar no peace, O thou thousandfold cuckold!",
my brother replied, "by Allah, I did nothing but turn the mill in the
place of the bull all night till morning!" "Tell me thy tale," quoth
he; and my brother recounted what had befallen him and he said, "Thy
star agrees not with her star; but an thou wilt I can alter the
contract for thee," adding, "'Ware lest another cheat be not in store
for thee." And my brother answered him, "See if thou have not another
contrivance." Then the clerk left him and he sat in his shop, looking
for some one to bring him a job whereby he might earn his day's bread.
Presently the handmaid came to him and said, "Speak with my lady."
"Begone, O my good girl," replied he, "there shall be no more dealings
between me and thy lady." The handmaid returned to her mistress and
told her what my brother had said and presently she put her head out of
the window, weeping and saying, "Why, O my beloved, are there to be no
more dealings 'twixt me and thee?" But he made her no answer. Then she
wept and conjured him, swearing that all which had befallen him in the
mill was not sanctioned by her and that she was innocent of the whole
matter. When he looked upon her beauty and loveliness and heard the
sweetness of her speech, the sorrow which had possessed him passed from
his heart; he accepted her excuse and he rejoiced in her sight. So he
saluted her and talked with her and sat tailoring awhile, after which
the handmaid came to him and said, "My mistress greeteth thee and
informeth thee that her husband purposeth to lie abroad this night in
the house of some intimate friends of his; so, when he is gone, do thou
come to us and spend the night with my lady in delightsomest joyance
till the morning." Now her husband had asked her, "How shall we manage
to turn him away from thee?"; and she answered, "Leave me to play him
another trick and make him a laughing stock for all the town." But my
brother knew naught of the malice of women. As soon as it was dusk, the
slave girl came to him and carried him to the house, and when the lady
saw him she said to him, "By Allah, O my lord, I have been longing
exceedingly for thee." "By Allah," cried he, "kiss me quick before thou
give me aught else."[FN#642] Hardly had he spoken, when the lady's
husband came in from the next room[FN#643] and seized him, saying, "By
Allah, I will not let thee go, till I deliver thee to the chief of the
town watch." My brother humbled himself to him; but he would not listen
to him and carried him before the Prefect who gave him an hundred
lashes with a whip and, mounting him on a camel, promenaded him round
about the city, whilst the guards proclaimed aloud, "This is his reward
who violateth the Harims of honourable men!" Moreover, he fell off the
camel and broke his leg and so became lame. Then the Prefect banished
him from the city; and he went forth unknowing whither he should wend;
but I heard of him and fearing for him went out after him and brought
him back secretly to the city and restored him to health and took him
into my house where he still liveth. The Caliph laughed at my story and
said, "Thou hast done well, O Samit, O Silent Man, O spare of speech!";
and he bade me take a present and go away. But I said, "I will accept
naught of thee except I tell thee what befell all my other brothers;
and do not think me a man of many words." So the Caliph gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his Second Brother.


Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that my second brother's name was
Al-Haddar, that is the Babbler, and he was the paralytic. Now it
happened to him one day, as he was going about his business, that an
old woman accosted him and said, "Stop a little, my good man, that I
may tell thee of somewhat which, if it be to thy liking, thou shalt do
for me and I will pray Allah to give thee good of it!" My brother
stopped and she went on, "I will put thee in the way of a certain
thing, so thou not be prodigal of speech." "On with thy talk," quoth
he; and she, "What sayest thou to handsome quarters and a fair garden
with flowing waters, flowers blooming, and fruit growing, and old wine
going and a pretty young face whose owner thou mayest embrace from dark
till dawn? If thou do whatso I bid thee thou shalt see something
greatly to thy advantage." "And is all this in the world?" asked my
brother; and she answered, "Yes, and it shall be thine, so thou be
reasonable and leave idle curiosity and many words, and do my bidding."
"I will indeed, O my lady," said he, "how is it thou hast preferred me
in this matter before all men and what is it that so much pleaseth thee
in me?" Quoth she, "Did I not bid thee be spare of speech? Hold thy
peace and follow me. Know, that the young lady, to whom I shall carry
thee, loveth to have her own way and hateth being thwarted and all who
gainsay; so, if thou humour her, thou shalt come to thy desire of her."
And my brother said, "I will not cross her in anything." Then she went
on and my brother followed her, an hungering after what she described
to him till they entered a fine large house, handsome and choicely
furnished, full of eunuchs and servants and showing signs of prosperity
from top to bottom. And she was carrying him to the upper story when
the people of the house said to him, "What dost thou here?" But the old
woman answered them, "Hold your peace and trouble him not: he is a
workman and we have occasion for him." Then she brought him into a fine
great pavilion, with a garden in its midst, never eyes saw a fairer;
and made him sit upon a handsome couch. He had not sat long, be fore he
heard a loud noise and in came a troop of slave girls surrounding a
lady like the moon on the night of its fullest. When he saw her, he
rose up and made an obeisance to her, whereupon she welcomed him and
bade him be seated. So he sat down and she said to him, "Allah advance
thee to honour! Is all well with thee?" "O my lady," he answered, "all
with me is right well." Then she bade bring in food, and they set
before her delicate viands; so she sat down to eat, making a show of
affection to my brother and jesting with him, though all the while she
could not refrain from laughing; but as often as he looked at her, she
signed towards her handmaidens as though she were laughing at them. My
brother (the ass!) understood nothing; but, in the excess of his
ridiculous passion, he fancied that the lady was in love with him and
that she would soon grant him his desire. When they had done eating,
they set on the wine and there came in ten maidens like moons, with
lutes ready strung in their hands, and fell to singing with full
voices, sweet and sad, whereupon delight gat hold upon him and he took
the cup from the lady's hands and drank it standing. Then she drank a
cup of wine and my brother (still standing) said to her "Health," and
bowed to her. She handed him another cup and he drank it off, when she
slapped him hard on the nape of his neck.[FN#644] Upon this my brother
would have gone out of the house in anger; but the old woman followed
him and winked to him to return. So he came back and the lady bade him
sit and he sat down without a word. Then she again slapped him on the
nape of his neck; and the second slapping did not suffice her, she must
needs make all her handmaidens also slap and cuff him, while he kept
saying to the old woman, "I never saw aught nicer than this." She on
her side ceased not exclaiming, "Enough, enough, I conjure thee, O my
mistress!"; but the women slapped him till he well nigh swooned away.
Presently my brother rose and went out to obey a call of nature, but
the old woman overtook him, and said, "Be patient a little and thou
shalt win to thy wish." "How much longer have I to wait," my brother
replied, "this slapping hath made me feel faint." "As soon as she is
warm with wine," answered she, "thou shalt have thy desire." So he
returned to his place and sat down, where upon all the handmaidens
stood up and the lady bade them perfume him with pastiles and
besprinkle his face with rose-water. Then said she to him, "Allah
advance thee to honour! Thou hast entered my house and hast borne with
my conditions, for whoso thwarteth me I turn him away, and whoso is
patient hath his desire." "O mistress mine," said he, "I am thy slave
and in the hollow of thine hand!" "Know, then," continued she, "that
Allah hath made me passionately fond of frolic; and whoso falleth in
with my humour cometh by whatso he wisheth." Then she ordered her
maidens to sing with loud voices till the whole company was delighted;
after which she said to one of them, "Take thy lord, and do what is
needful for him and bring him back to me forthright." So the damsel
took my brother (and he not knowing what she would do with him); but
the old woman overtook him and said, "Be patient; there remaineth but
little to do." At this his face brightened and he stood up before the
lady while the old woman kept saying, "Be patient; thou wilt now at
once win to thy wish!"; till he said, "Tell me what she would have the
maiden do with me?" "Nothing but good," replied she, "as I am thy
sacrifice! She wisheth only to dye thy eyebrows and pluck out thy
mustachios." Quoth he, "As for the dyeing of my eye brows, that will
come off with washing,[FN#645] but for the plucking out of my
mustachios, that indeed is a somewhat painful process." "Be cautious
how thou cross her," cried the old woman; "for she hath set her heart
on thee." So my brother patiently suffered her to dye his eyebrows and
pluck out his mustachios, after which the maiden returned to her
mistress and told her. Quoth she "Remaineth now only one other thing to
be done; thou must shave his beard and make him a smooth o'
face."[FN#646] So the maiden went back and told him what her mistress
had bidden her do; and my brother (the blockhead!) said to her, "How
shall I do what will disgrace me before the folk?" But the old woman
said, "She would do on this wise only that thou mayst be as a beardless
youth and that no hair be left on thy face to scratch and prick her
delicate cheeks; for indeed she is passionately in love with thee. So
be patient and thou shalt attain thine object." My brother was patient
and did her bidding and let shave off his beard and, when he was
brought back to the lady, lo! he appeared dyed red as to his eyebrows,
plucked of both mustachios, shorn of his beard, rouged on both cheeks.
At first she was affrighted at him; then she made mockery of him and,
laughing till she fell upon her back, said, "O my lord, thou hast
indeed won my heart by thy good nature!" Then she conjured him, by her
life, to stand up and dance, and he arose, and capered about, and there
was not a cushion in the house but she threw it at his head, and in
like manner did all her women who also kept pelting him with oranges
and lemons and citrons till he fell down senseless from the cuffing on
the nape of the neck, the pillowing and the fruit pelting. "Now thou
hast attained thy wish," said the old woman when he came round; "there
are no more blows in store for thee and there remaineth but one little
thing to do. It is her wont, when she is in her cups, to let no one
have her until she put off her dress and trousers and remain stark
naked.[FN#647] Then she will bid thee doff thy clothes and run; and she
will run before thee as if she were flying from thee; and do thou
follow her from place to place till thy prickle stands at fullest
point, when she will yield to thee;"[FN#648] adding, "Strip off thy
clothes at once." So he rose, well nigh lost in ecstasy and, doffing
his raiment, showed himself mother naked.—And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

When it was the Thirty-second Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the old
woman said to the Barber's second brother, "Doff thy clothes," he rose,
well nigh lost in ecstasy; and, stripping off his raiment, showed
himself mother naked. Whereupon the lady stripped also and said to my
brother, "If thou want anything run after me till thou catch me." Then
she set out at a run and he ran after her while she rushed into room
after room and rushed out of room after room, my brother scampering
after her in a rage of desire like a veritable madman, with yard
standing terribly tall. After much of this kind she dashed into a
darkened place, and he dashed after her; but suddenly he trod upon a
yielding spot, which gave way under his weight; and, before he was
aware where he was, he found himself in the midst of a crowded market,
part of the bazar of the leather sellers who were crying the prices of
skins and hides and buying and selling. When they saw him in his
plight, naked, with standing yard, shorn of beard and mustachios, with
eyebrows dyed red, and cheeks ruddied with rouge, they shouted and
clapped their hands at him, and set to flogging him with skins upon his
bare body till a swoon came over him. Then they threw him on the back
of an ass and carried him to the Chief of Police. Quoth the Chief,
"What is this?" Quoth they, "This fellow fell suddenly upon us out of
the Wazir's house[FN#649] in this state." So the Prefect gave him an
hundred lashes and then banished him from Baghdad. However I went out
after him and brought him back secretly into the city and made him a
daily allowance for his living: although, were it not for my generous
humour, I could not have put up with the like of him. Then the Caliph
gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his Third Brother.


My third brother's name was Al-Fakík, the Gabbler, who was blind. One
day Fate and Fortune drove him to a fine large house, and he knocked at
the door, desiring speech of its owner that he might beg somewhat of
him. Quoth the master of the house, "Who is at the door?" But my
brother spake not a word and presently he heard him repeat with a loud
voice, "Who is this?" Still he made no answer and immediately heard the
master walk to the door and open it and say, "What dost thou want?" My
brother answered "Something for Allah Almighty's sake."[FN#650] "Art
thou blind?" asked the man, and my brother answered "Yes." Quoth the
other, "Stretch me out thy hand." So my brother put out his hand
thinking that he would give him something; but he took it and, drawing
him into the house, carried him up from stair to stair till they
reached the terrace on the house top, my brother thinking the while
that he would surely give him something of food or money. Then he asked
my brother, "What dost thou want, O blind man?" and he answered,
"Something for the Almighty's sake." "Allah open for thee some other
door!" "O thou! why not say so when I was below stairs?" "O cadger, why
not answer me when I first called to thee?" "And what meanest thou to
do for me now?" "There is nothing in the house to give thee." "Then
take me down the stair." "The path is before thee." So my brother rose
and made his way downstairs, till he came within twenty steps of the
door, when his foot slipped and he rolled to the bottom and broke his
head. Then he went out, unknowing whither to turn, and presently fell
in with two other blind men, companions of his, who said to him, "What
didst thou gain to day?" He told them what had befallen him and added,
"O my brothers, I wish to take some of the money in my hands and
provide myself with it." Now the master of the house had followed him
and was listening to what they said; but neither my brother nor his
comrades knew of this. So my brother went to his lodging and sat down
to await his companions, and the house owner entered after him without
being perceived. When the other blind men arrived, my brother said to
them, "Bolt the door and search the house lest any stranger have
followed us." The man, hearing this, caught hold of a cord that hung
from the ceiling and clung to it, whilst they went round about the
house and searched but found no one. So they came back, and, sitting
beside my brother, brought out their money which they counted and lo!
it was twelve thousand dirhams. Each took what he wanted and they
buried the rest in a corner of the room. Then they set on food and sat
down, to eat. Presently my brother, hearing a strange pair of jaws
munching by his side,[FN#651] said to his friends, "There is a stranger
amongst us;" and, putting forth his hand, caught hold of that of the
house master. Thereupon all fell on him and beat him;[FN#652] and when
tired of belabouring him they shouted, "O ye Moslems! a thief is come
in to us, seeking to take our money!" A crowd gathered around them,
whereupon the intruder hung on to them; and complained with them as
they complained, and, shutting his eyes like them, so that none might
doubt his blindness, cried out, "O Moslems, I take refuge with Allah
and the Governor, for I have a matter to make known to him!" Suddenly
up came the watch and, laying hands on the whole lot (my brother being
amongst them), drove them[FN#653] to the Governor's who set them before
him and asked, "What news with you?" Quoth the intruder, "Look and find
out for thyself, not a word shall be wrung from us save by torture, so
begin by beating me and after me beat this man our leader."[FN#654] And
he pointed to my brother. So they threw the man at full length and gave
him four hundred sticks on his backside. The beating pained him,
whereupon he opened one eye and, as they redoubled their blows, he
opened the other eye. When the Governor saw this he said to him, "What
have we here, O accursed?"; whereto he replied, "Give me the seal-ring
of pardon! We four have shammed blind, and we impose upon people that
we may enter houses and look upon the unveiled faces of the women and
contrive for their corruption. In this way we have gotten great gain
and our store amounts to twelve thousand dirhams. Said I to my company,
'Give me my share, three thousand;' but they rose and beat me and took
away my money, and I seek refuge with Allah and with thee; better thou
have my share than they. So, if thou wouldst know the truth of my
words, beat one and every of the others more than thou hast beaten me,
and he will surely open his eyes." The Governor gave orders for the
question to begin with my brother, and they bound him to the whipping
post,[FN#655] and the Governor said, "O scum of the earth, do ye abuse
the gracious gifts of Allah and make as if ye were blind!" "Allah!
Allah!" cried my brother, "by Allah, there is none among us who can
see." Then they beat him till he swooned away and the Governor cried,
"Leave him till he come to and then beat him again." After this he
caused each of the companions to receive more than three hundred
sticks, whilst the sham-abraham kept saying to them "Open your eyes or
you will be beaten afresh." At last the man said to the Governor,
"Dispatch some one with me to bring thee the money; for these fellows
will not open their eyes, lest they incur disgrace before the folk." So
the Governor sent to fetch the money and gave the man his pretended
share, three thousand dirhams; and, keeping the rest for himself,
banished the three blind men from the city. But I, O Commander of the
Faithful, went out and overtaking my brother questioned him of his
case; whereupon he told me of what I have told thee; so I brought him
secretly into the city, and appointed him (in the strictest privacy) an
allowance for meat and drink! The Caliph laughed at my story and said,
"Give him a gift and let him go;" but I said, "By Allah! I will take
naught till I have made known to the Commander of the Faithful what
came to pass with the rest of my brothers; for truly I am a man of few
words and spare of speech." Then the Caliph gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his Fourth Brother.


Now as for my fourth brother, O Commander of the Faithful, Al-Kuz
al-aswáni, or the long necked Gugglet hight, from his brimming over
with words, the same who was blind of one eye, he became a butcher in
Baghdad and he sold flesh and fattened rams; and great men and rich
bought their meat of him, so that he amassed much wealth and got him
cattle and houses. He fared thus a long while, till one day, as he was
sitting in his shop, there came up an old man and long o' the beard,
who laid down some silver and said, "Give me meat for this." He gave
him his money s worth of flesh and the oldster went his ways. My
brother examined the Shaykh's silver, and, seeing that the dirhams were
white and bright, he set them in a place apart. The greybeard continued
to return to the shop regularly for five months, and my brother ceased
not to lay up all the coin he received from him in its own box. At last
he thought to take out the money to buy sheep; so he opened the box and
found in it nothing, save bits of white paper cut round to look like
coin;[FN#656] so he buffeted his face and cried aloud till the folk
gathered about him, whereupon he told them his tale which made them
marvel exceedingly. Then he rose as was his wont, and slaughtering a
ram hung it up inside his shop; after which he cut off some of the
flesh, and hanging it outside kept saying to himself, "O Allah, would
the ill omened old fellow but come!" And an hour had not passed before
the Shaykh came with his silver in hand; where upon my brother rose and
caught hold of him calling out, "Come aid me, O Moslems, and learn my
story with this villain!" When the old man heard this, he quietly said
to him, "Which will be the better for thee, to let go of me or to be
disgraced by me amidst the folk?" "In what wilt thou disgrace me?" "In
that thou sellest man's flesh for mutton!" "Thou liest, thou accursed!"
"Nay, he is the accursed who hath a man hanging up by way of meat in
his shop. If the matter be as thou sayest, I give thee lawful leave to
take my money and my life." Then the old man cried out aloud, "Ho, ye
people! if you would prove the truth of my words, enter this man's
shop." The folk rushed in and found that the ram was become a dead
man[FN#657] hung up for sale. So they set upon my brother crying out,
"O Infidel! O villain!"; and his best friends fell to cuffing and
kicking him and kept saying, "Dost thou make us eat flesh of the sons
of Adam?" Furthermore, the old man struck him on the eye and put it
out. Then they carried the carcass, with the throat cut, before the
Chief of the city watch, to whom the old man said, "O Emir, this fellow
butchers men and sells their flesh for mutton and we have brought him
to thee; so arise and execute the judgments of Allah (to whom be honour
and glory!)." My brother would have defended himself, but the Chief
refused to hear him and sentenced him to receive five hundred sticks
and to forfeit the whole of his property. And, indeed, had it not been
for that same property which he expended in bribes, they would have
surely slain him. Then the Chief banished him from Baghdad; and my
brother fared forth at a venture, till he came to a great town, where
he thought it best to set up as a cobbler; so he opened a shop and sat
there doing what he could for his livelihood. One day, as he went forth
on his business, he heard the distant tramp of horses and, asking the
cause, was told that the King was going out to hunt and course; so my
brother stopped to look at the fine suite. It so fortuned that the
King's eye met my brother's; whereupon the King hung down his head and
said, "I seek refuge with Allah from the evil of this day!";[FN#658]
and turned the reins of his steed and returned home with all his
retinue. Then he gave orders to his guards, who seized my brother and
beat him with a beating so painful that he was well nigh dead; and my
brother knew not what could be the cause of his maltreatment, after
which he returned to his place in sorriest plight. Soon afterwards he
went to one of the King's household and related what had happened to
him; and the man laughed till he fell upon his back and cried, "O
brother mine, know that the King cannot bear to look at a monocular,
especially if he be blind of the right eye, in which case he doth not
let him go without killing him." When my brother heard this, he
resolved to fly from that city; so he went forth from it to another
wherein none knew him and there he abode a long while. One day, being
full of sorrowful thought for what had befallen him, he sallied out to
solace himself; and, as he was walking along, he heard the distant
tramp of horses behind him and said, "The judgement of Allah is upon
me!" and looked about for a hiding place but found none. At last he saw
a closed door which he pushed hard: it yielded. and he entered a long
gallery in which he took refuge, but hardly had he done so, when two
men set upon him crying out, "Allah be thanked for having delivered
thee into our hands, O enemy of God! These three nights thou hast
robbed us of our rest and sleep, and verily thou hast made us taste of
the death cup." My brother asked, "O folk, what ails you?"; and they
answered, "Thou givest us the change and goest about to disgrace us and
plannest some plot to cut the throat of the house master! Is it not
enough that thou hast brought him to beggary, thou and thy fellows? But
now give us up the knife wherewith thou threatenest us every night."
Then they searched him and found in his waist belt the knife used for
his shoe leather; and he said, "O people, have the fear of Allah before
your eyes and maltreat me not, for know that my story is a right
strange!" "And what is thy story?" said they: so he told them what had
befallen him, hoping they would let him go; however they paid no heed
to what he said and, instead of showing some regard, beat him
grievously and tore off his clothes: then, finding on his sides the
scars of beating with rods, they said, "O accursed! these marks are the
manifest signs of thy guilt!" They carried him before the Governor,
whilst he said to himself, "I am now punished for my sins and none can
deliver me save Allah Almighty!" The Governor addressing my brother
asked him, "O villain, what led thee to enter their house with
intention to murther?"; and my brother answered, "I conjure thee by
Allah, O Emir, hear my words and be not hasty in condemning me!" But
the Governor cried, "Shall we listen to the words of a robber who hath
beggared these people, and who beareth on his back the scar of his
stripes?" adding, "They surely had not done this to thee, save for some
great crime." So he sentenced him to receive an hundred cuts with the
scourge, after which they set him on a camel and paraded him about the
city, proclaiming, "This is the requital and only too little to requite
him who breaketh into people's houses." Then they thrust him out of the
city, and my brother wandered at random, till I heard what had befallen
him; and, going in search of him, questioned him of his case; so he
acquainted me with his story and all his mischances, and I carried him
secretly to the city where I made him an allowance for his meat and
drink. Then the Caliph gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his Fifth Brother.


My fifth brother, Al-Nashshár,[FN#659] the Babbler, the same who was
cropped of both ears, O Commander of the Faithful, was an asker wont to
beg of folk by night and live on their alms by day. Now when our
father, who was an old man well stricken in years sickened and died, he
left us seven hundred dirhams whereof each son took his hundred; but,
as my fifth brother received his portion, he was perplexed and knew not
what to do with it. While in this uncertainty he bethought him to lay
it out on glass ware of all sorts and turn an honest penny on its
price. So he bought an hundred dirhams worth of verroterie and, putting
it into a big tray, sat down to sell it on a bench at the foot of a
wall against which he leant back. As he sat with the tray before him he
fell to musing and said to himself, "Know, O my good Self, that the
head of my wealth, my principal invested in this glass ware, is an
hundred dirhams. I will assuredly sell it for two hundred with which I
will forthright buy other glass and make by it four hundred; nor will I
cease to sell and buy on this wise, till I have gotten four thousand
and soon find myself the master of much money. With these coins I will
buy merchandise and jewels and ottars[FN#660] and gain great profit on
them; till, Allah willing, I will make my capital an hundred thousand
dirhams. Then I will purchase a fine house with white slaves and
eunuchs and horses; and I will eat and drink and disport myself; nor
will I leave a singing man or a singing woman in the city, but I will
summon them to my palace and make them perform before me." All this he
counted over in his mind, while the tray of glass ware,: worth an
hundred dirhams, stood on the bench before him, and, after looking at
it, he continued, "And when, Inshallah! my capital shall have become
one hundred thousand[FN#661] dinars, I will send out marriage
brokeresses to require for me in wedlock the daughters of Kings and
Wazirs; and I will demand to wife the eldest daughter of the Prime
Minister; for it hath reached me that she is perfect in beauty and
prime in loveliness and rare in accomplishments. I will give a marriage
settlement of one thousand dinars; and, if her father consent, well:
but if not I will take her by force from under his very nose. When she
is safely homed in my house, I will buy ten little eunuchs[FN#662] and
for myself a robe of the robes of Kings and Sultans; and get me a
saddle of gold and a bridle set thick with gems of price. Then I will
mount with the Mamelukes preceding me and surrounding me, and I will
make the round of the city whilst the folk salute me and bless me;
after which I will repair to the Wazir (he that is father of the girl)
with armed white slaves before and behind me and on my right and on my
left. When he sees me, the Wazir stands up, and seating me in his own
place sits down much below me; for that I am to be his son in law. Now
I have with me two eunuchs carrying purses, each containing a thousand
dinars; and of these I deliver to him the thousand, his daughter's
marriage settlement, and make him a free gift of the other thousand,
that he may have reason to know my generosity and liberality and my
greatness of spirit and the littleness of the world in my eyes. And for
ten words he addresses to me I answer him two. Then back I go to my
house, and if one come to me on the bride's part, I make him a present
of money and throw on him a dress of honour; but if he bring me a gift,
I give it back to him and refuse to accept it,[FN#663] that they may
learn what a proud spirit is mine which never condescends to derogate.
Thus I establish my rank and status. When this is done I appoint her
wedding night and adorn my house showily! gloriously! And as the time
for parading the bride is come, I don my finest attire and sit down on
a mattress of gold brocade, propping up my elbow with a pillow, and
turning neither to the right nor to the left; but looking only straight
in front for the haughtiness of my mind and the gravity of my
understanding. And there before me stands my wife in her raiment and
ornaments, lovely as the full moon; and I, in my loftiness and dread
lordliness,[FN#664] will not glance at her till those present say to
me, 'O our lord and our master, thy wife, thy handmaid, standeth before
thee; vouchsafe her one look, for standing wearieth her.' Then they
kiss the ground before me many times; whereupon I raise my eyes and
cast at her one single glance and turn my face earthwards again. Then
they bear her off to the bride chamber,[FN#665] and I arise and change
my clothes for a far finer suit; and, when they bring in the bride a
second time, I deign not to throw her a look till they have begged me
many times; after which I glance at her out of the corner of one eye,
and then bend down my head. I continue acting after this fashion till
the parading and displaying are completed[FN#666]"—And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

When It was the Thirty-third Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Barber's
fifth brother proceeded:—"Then I bend down my head and continue acting
after this fashion till her parading and displaying are completed.
Thereupon I order one of my eunuchs to bring me a bag of five hundred
dinars which I give as largesse to the tire women present and bid them
one and all lead me to the bride chamber. When they leave me alone with
her I neither look at her nor speak to her, but lie[FN#667] by her side
with my face to the wall showing my contempt, that each and every may
again remark how high and haughty I am. Presently her mother comes in
to me, and kissing[FN#668] my head and hand, says to me, 'O my lord,
look upon thine handmaid who longs for thy favour; so heal her broken
spirit!' I give her no answer; and when she sees this she rises and
busses my feet many times and says, 'O my lord, in very sooth my
daughter is a beautiful maid, who hath never known man; and if thou
show her this backwardness and aversion, her heart will break; so do
thou incline to her and speak to her and soothe her mind and spirit.'
Then she rises and fetches a cup of wine; and says to her daughter,
'Take it and hand it to thy lord.' But as she approaches me I leave her
standing between my hands and sit, propping my elbow on a round cushion
purfled with gold thread, leaning lazily back, and without looking at
her in the majesty of my spirit, so that she may deem me indeed a
Sultan and a mighty man. Then she says to me, 'O my lord, Allah upon
thee, do not refuse to take the cup from the hand of thine hand maid,
for verily I am thy bondswoman.' But I do not speak to her and she
presses me, saying, 'There is no help but that thou drink it;' and she
puts it to my lips. Then I shake my fist in her face and kick her with
my foot thus." So he let out with his toe and knocked over the tray of
glass ware which fell to the ground and, falling from the bench, all
that was on it was broken to bits. 'O foulest of pimps,[FN#669] this
comes from the pride of my spirit'" cried my brother; and then, O
Commander of the Faithful, he buffeted his face and rent his garments
and kept on weeping and beating himself. The folk who were flocking to
their Friday prayers saw him; and some of them looked at him and pitied
him, whilst others paid no heed to him, and in this way my brother lost
both capital and profit. He remained weeping a long while, and at last
up came a beautiful lady, the scent of musk exhaling from her, who was
going to Friday prayers riding a mule with a gold saddle and followed
by several eunuchs. When she saw the broken glass and my brother
weeping, her kind heart was moved to pity for him, and she asked what
ailed him and was told that he had a tray full of glass ware by the
sale of which he hoped to gain his living, but it was broken, and (said
they), "there befell him what thou seest." Thereupon she called up one
of her eunuchs and said to him, Give what thou hast with thee to this
poor fellow!". And he gave my brother a purse in which he found five
hundred dinars; and when it touched his hand he was well nigh dying for
excess of joy and he offered up blessings for her. Then he returned to
his abode a substantial man; and, as he sat considering, some one
rapped at the door. So he rose and opened and saw an old woman whom he
had never seen. "O my son," said she, "know that prayer tide is near
and I have not yet made my Wuzu-ablution;[FN#670] so kindly allow me
the use of thy lodging for the purpose." My brother answered, "To hear
is to comply;" and going in bade her follow him. So she entered and he
brought her an ewer wherewith to wash, and sat down like to fly with
joy because of the dinars which he had tied up in his belt for a purse.
When the old woman had made an end of her ablution, she came up to
where he sat, and prayed a two bow prayer; after which she blessed my
brother with a godly benediction, and he while thanking her put his
hand to the dinars and gave her two, saying to himself "These are my
voluntaries."[FN#671] When she saw the gold she cried, "Praise be to
Allah! why dost thou look on one who loveth thee as if she were a
beggar? Take back thy money: I have no need of it; or, if thou want it
not, return it to her who gave it thee when thy glass ware was broken.
Moreover, if thou wish to be united with her, I can manage the matter,
for she is my mistress." "O my mother," asked my brother, "by what
manner of means can I get at her?"; and she answered, "O my son! she
hath an inclination for thee, but she is the wife of a wealthy man; so
take the whole of thy money with thee and follow me, that I may guide
thee to thy desire: and when thou art in her company spare neither
persuasion nor fair words, but bring them all to bear upon her; so
shalt thou enjoy her beauty and wealth to thy heart's content." My
brother took all his gold and rose and followed the old woman, hardly
believing in his luck. She ceased not faring on, and my brother
following her, till they came to a tall gate at which she knocked and a
Roumi slave-girl[FN#672] came out and opened to them. Then the old
woman led my brother into a great sitting room spread with wondrous
fine carpets and hung with curtains, where he sat down with his gold
before him, and his turband on his knee.[FN#673] He had scarcely taken
seat before there came to him a young lady (never eye saw fairer) clad
in garments of the most sumptuous; whereupon my brother rose to his
feet, and she smiled in his face and welcomed him, signing to him to be
seated. Then she bade shut the door and, when it was shut, she turned
to my brother, and taking his hand conducted him to a private chamber
furnished with various kinds of brocades and gold cloths. Here he sat
down and she sat by his side and toyed with him awhile; after which she
rose and saying, "Stir not from thy seat till I come back to thee;"
disappeared. Meanwhile as he was on this wise, lo! there came in to him
a black slave big of body and bulk and holding a drawn sword in hand,
who said to him, "Woe to thee! Who brought thee hither and what dost
thou want here?" My brother could not return him a reply, being tongue
tied for terror; so the blackamoor seized him and stripped him of his
clothes and bashed him with the flat of his sword blade till he fell to
the ground, swooning from excess of belabouring. The ill omened nigger
fancied that there was an end of him and my brother heard him cry,
"Where is the salt wench?"[FN#674] Where upon in came a handmaid
holding in hand a large tray of salt, and the slave kept rubbing it
into my brother's wounds;[FN#675] but he did not stir fearing lest the
slave might find out that he was not dead and kill him outright. Then
the salt girl went away, and the slave cried Where is the
souterrain[FN#676] guardianess?" Hereupon in came the old woman and
dragged my brother by his feet to a souterrain and threw him down upon
a heap of dead bodies. In this place he lay two full days, but Allah
made the salt the means of preserving his life by staunching the blood
and staying its flow Presently, feeling himself able to move,
Al-Nashshar rose and opened the trap door in fear and trembling and
crept out into the open; and Allah protected him, so that he went on in
the darkness and hid himself in the vestibule till dawn, when he saw
the accursed beldam sally forth in quest of other quarry. He followed
in her wake without her knowing it, and made for his own lodging where
he dressed his wounds and medicined himself till he was whole.
Meanwhile he used to watch the old woman, tracking her at all times and
seasons, and saw her accost one man after another and carry them to the
house. However he uttered not a word; but, as soon as he waxed hale and
hearty, he took a piece of stuff and made it into a bag which he filled
with broken glass and bound about his middle. He also disguised himself
as a Persian that none might know him, and hid a sword under his
clothes of foreign cut. Then he went out and presently, falling in with
the old woman, said to her, speaking Arabic with a Persian accent,
"Venerable lady,[FN#677] I am a stranger arrived but this day here
where I know no one. Hast thou a pair of scales wherein I may weigh
eleven hundred dinars? I will give thee somewhat of them for thy
pains." "I have a son, a money changer, who keepeth all kinds of
scales," she answered, "so come with me to him before he goeth out and
he will weigh thy gold." My brother answered "Lead the way!" She led
him to the house and the young lady herself came out and opened it,
whereupon the old woman smiled in her face and said, "I bring thee fat
meat today."[FN#678] Then the damsel took my brother by the hand, and
led him to the same chamber as before; where she sat with him awhile
then rose and went forth saying, "Stir not from thy seat till I come
back to thee." Presently in came the accursed slave with the drawn
sword and cried to my brother, "Up and be damned to thee." So he rose,
and as the slave walked on before him he drew the sword from under his
clothes and smote him with it, making head fly from body. Then he
dragged the corpse by the feet to the souterrain and called out, "Where
is the salt wench?" Up came the girl carrying the tray of salt and,
seeing my brother sword in hand, turned to fly; but he followed her and
struck off her head. Then he called out, "Where is the souterrain
guardianess? , and in came the old woman to whom he said, "Dost know me
again, ill omened hag?" "No my lord," she replied, and he said, "I am
the owner of the five hundred gold pieces, whose house thou enteredst
to make the ablution and to pray, and whom thou didst snare hither and
betray." "Fear Allah and spare me," cried she; but he regarded her not
and struck her with the sword till he had cut her in four. Then he went
to look for the young lady; and when she saw him her reason fled and
she cried out piteously "Aman![FN#679] Mercy!" So he spared her and
asked, "What made thee consort with this blackamoor?", and she
answered, "I was slave to a certain merchant, and the old woman used to
visit me till I took a liking to her. One day she said to me, 'We have
a marriage festival at our house the like of which was never seen and I
wish thee to enjoy the sight.' 'To hear is to obey,' answered I, and
rising arrayed myself in my finest raiment and ornaments, and took with
me a purse containing an hundred gold pieces. Then she brought me
hither and hardly had I entered the house when the black seized on me,
and I have remained in this case three whole years through the perfidy
of the accursed beldam." Then my brother asked her, "Is there anything
of his in the house?"; whereto she answered, "Great store of wealth,
and if thou art able to carry it away, do so and Allah give thee good
of it" My brother went with her and she opened to him sundry chests
wherein were money bags, at which he was astounded; then she said to
him, "Go now and leave me here, and fetch men to remove the money.", He
went out and hired ten men, but when he returned he found the door wide
open, the damsel gone and nothing left but some small matter of coin
and the household stuffs.[FN#680] By this he knew that the girl had
overreached him; so he opened the store rooms and seized what was in
them, together with the rest of the money, leaving nothing in the
house. He passed the night rejoicing, but when morning dawned he found
at the door some twenty troopers who laid hands on him saying, "The
Governor wants thee!" My brother implored them hard to let him return
to his house; and even offered them a large sum of money; but they
refused and, binding him fast with cords, carried him off. On the way
they met a friend of my brother who clung to his skirt and implored his
protection, begging him to stand by him and help to deliver him out of
their hands. The man stopped, and asked them what was the matter, and
they answered, "The Governor hath ordered us to bring this fellow
before him and, look ye, we are doing so." My brother's friend urged
them to release him, and offered them five hundred dinars to let him
go, saying, "When ye return to the Governor tell him that you were
unable to find him." But they would not listen to his words and took my
brother, dragging him along on his face, and set him before the
Governor who asked him, "Whence gottest thou these stuffs and monies?";
and he answered, "I pray for mercy!" So the Governor gave him the
kerchief of mercy;[FN#681] and he told him all that had befallen him
from first to last with the old woman and the flight of the damsel;
ending with, "Whatso I have taken, take of it what thou wilt, so thou
leave me sufficient to support life."[FN#682] But the Governor took the
whole of the stuffs and all the money for himself; and, fearing lest
the affair come to the Sultan's ears, he summoned my brother and said,
"Depart from this city, else I will hang thee." "Hearing and obedience"
quoth my brother and set out for another town. On the way thieves fell
foul of him and stripped and beat him and docked his ears; but I heard
tidings of his misfortunes and went out after him taking him clothes;
and brought him secretly into the city where I assigned to him an
allowance for meat and drink. And presently the Caliph gave ear to


The Barber’s Tale of his Sixth Brother.


My sixth brother, O Commander of the Faithful, Shakashik,[FN#683] or
Many clamours, the shorn of both lips, was once rich and became poor,
so one day he went out to beg somewhat to keep life in him. As he was
on the road he suddenly caught sight of a large and handsome mansion,
with a detached building wide and lofty at the entrance, where sat
sundry eunuchs bidding and forbidding.[FN#684] My brother enquired of
one of those idling there and he replied "The palace belongs to a scion
of the Barmaki house;" so he stepped up to the door keepers and asked
an alms of them "Enter," said they, "by the great gate and thou shalt
get what thou seekest from the Wazir our master." Accordingly he went
in and, passing through the outer entrance, walked on a while and
presently came to a mansion of the utmost beauty and elegance, paved
with marble, hung with curtains and having in the midst of it a flower
garden whose like he had never seen.[FN#685] My brother stood awhile as
one bewildered not knowing whither to turn his steps; then, seeing the
farther end of the sitting chamber tenanted, he walked up to it and
there found a man of handsome presence and comely beard. When this
personage saw my brother he stood up to him and welcomed him and asked
him of his case; whereto he replied that he was in want and needed
charity. Hearing these words the grandee showed great concern and,
putting his hand to his fine robe, rent it exclaiming, "What! am I in a
City, and thou here an hungered? I have not patience to bear such
disgrace!" Then he promised him all manner of good cheer and said,
"There is no help but that thou stay with me and eat of my
salt."[FN#686] "O my lord," answered my brother, "I can wait no longer;
for I am indeed dying of hunger." So he cried, "Ho boy! bring basin and
ewer;" and, turning to my brother, said, "O my guest come forward and
wash thy hands." My brother rose to do so but he saw neither ewer nor
basin; yet his host kept washing his hands with invisible soap in
imperceptible water and cried, "Bring the table!" But my brother again
saw nothing. Then said the host, "Honour me by eating of this meat and
be not ashamed." And he kept moving his hand to and fro as if he ate
and saying to my brother, "I wonder to see thee eating thus sparely: do
not stint thyself for I am sure thou art famished." So my brother began
to make as though he were eating whilst his host kept saying to him,
"Fall to, and note especially the excellence of this bread and its
whiteness!" But still my brother saw nothing. Then said he to himself,
"This man is fond of poking fun at people;" and replied, "O my lord, in
all my days I never knew aught more winsome than its whiteness or
sweeter than its savour." The Barmecide said, "This bread was baked by
a hand maid of mine whom I bought for five hundred dinars." Then he
called out, "Ho boy, bring in the meat pudding[FN#687] for our first
dish, and let there be plenty of fat in it;" and, turning to my brother
said, "O my guest, Allah upon thee, hast ever seen anything better than
this meat pudding? Now by my life, eat and be not abashed." Presently
he cried out again, "Ho boy, serve up the marinated stew[FN#688] with
the fatted sand grouse in it;" and he said to my brother, "Up and eat,
O my guest, for truly thou art hungry and needest food." So my brother
began wagging his jaws and made as if champing and chewing,[FN#689]
whilst the host continued calling for one dish after another and yet
produced nothing save orders to eat. Presently he cried out, "Ho boy,
bring us the chickens stuffed with pistachio nuts;" and said to my
brother, "By thy life, O my guest, I have fattened these chickens upon
pistachios; eat, for thou hast never eaten their like." "O my lord,"
replied my brother, "they are indeed first rate." Then the host began
motioning with his hand as though he were giving my brother a mouthful;
and ceased not to enumerate and expatiate upon the various dishes to
the hungry man whose hunger waxt still more violent, so that his soul
lusted after a bit of bread, even a barley scone.[FN#690] Quoth the
Barmecide, "Didst thou ever taste anything more delicious than the
seasoning of these dishes?"; and quoth my brother, "Never, O my lord!"
"Eat heartily and be not ashamed," said the host, and the guest, "I
have eaten my fill of meat;" So the entertainer cried, "Take away and
bring in the sweets;" and turning to my brother said, "Eat of this
almond conserve for it is prime and of these honey fritters; take this
one, by my life, the syrup runs out of it." "May I never be bereaved of
thee, O my lord," replied the hungry one and began to ask him about the
abundance of musk in the fritters. "Such is my custom," he answered:
"they put me a dinar weight of musk in every honey fritter and half
that quantity of ambergris." All this time my brother kept wagging head
and jaws till the master cried, "Enough of this. Bring us the dessert!"
Then said he to him,' "Eat of these almonds and walnuts and raisins;
and of this and that (naming divers kinds of dried fruits), and be not
abashed." But my brother replied, "O my lord, indeed I am full: I can
eat no more." "O my guest," repeated the host, "if thou have a mind to
these good things eat: Allah! Allah![FN#691] do not remain hungry;" but
my brother rejoined, "O my lord, he who hath eaten of all these dishes
how can he be hungry?" Then he considered and said to himself, "I will
do that shall make him repent of these pranks." Presently the
entertainer called out "Bring me the wine;" and, moving his hands in
the air, as though they had set it before them, he gave my brother a
cup and said, "Take this cup and, if it please thee, let me know." "O
my lord," he replied, "it is notable good as to nose but I am wont to
drink wine some twenty years old." "Knock then at this door,"[FN#692]
quoth the host "for thou canst not drink of aught better." "By thy
kindness," said my brother, motioning with his hand as though he were
drinking. "Health and joy to thee," exclaimed the house master and
feigned to fill a cup and drink it off; then he handed another to my
brother who quaffed it and made as if he were drunken. Presently he
took the host unawares; and, raising his arm till the white of his
armpit appeared, dealt him such a cuff on the nape of his neck that the
palace echoed to it. Then he came down upon him with a second cuff and
the entertainer cried aloud "What is this, O thou scum of the earth?"
"O my lord," replied my brother, "thou hast shown much kindness to thy
slave, and admitted him into thine abode and given him to eat of thy
victual; then thou madest him drink of thine old wine till he became
drunken and boisterous; but thou art too noble not to bear with his
ignorance and pardon his offence." When the Barmaki heard my brother's
words he laughed his loudest and said, "Long have I been wont to make
mock of men and play the madcap among my intimates, but never yet have
I come across a single one who had the patience and the wit to enter
into all my humours save thyself: so I forgive thee, and thou shalt be
my boon companion in very sooth and never leave me." Then he ordered
the servants to lay the table in earnest and they set on all the dishes
of which he had spoken in sport; and he and my brother ate till they
were satisfied; after which they removed to the drinking chamber, where
they found damsels like moons who sang all manner songs and played on
all manner instruments. There they remained drinking till their wine
got the better of them and the host treated my brother like a familiar
friend, so that he became as it were his brother, and bestowed on him a
robe of honour and loved him with exceeding love. Next morning the two
fell again to feasting and carousing, and ceased not to lead this life
for a term of twenty years; at the end of which the Barmecide died and
the Sultan took possession of all his wealth and squeezed my brother of
his savings, till he was left a pauper without a penny to handle. So he
quitted the city and fled forth following his face;[FN#693] but, when
he was half way between two towns, the wild Arabs fell on him and bound
him and carried him to their camp, where his captor proceeded to
torture him, saying, "Buy thy life of me with thy money, else I will
slay thee!" My brother began to weep and replied, "By Allah, I have
nothing, neither gold nor silver; but I am thy prisoner; so do with me
what thou wilt." Then the Badawi drew a knife, broad bladed and so
sharp grinded that if plunged into a camel's throat it would sever it
clean across from one jugular to the other,[FN#694] and cut off my
brother's lips and waxed more instant in requiring money. Now this
Badawi had a fair wife who in her husband's absence used to make
advances to my brother and offer him her favours, but he held off from
her. One day she began to tempt him as usual and he played with her and
made her sit on his lap, when behold, in came the Badawi who, seeing
this, cried out, "Woe to thee, O accursed villain, wouldest thou
debauch my wife for me?" Then he took out a knife and cut off my
brother's yard, after which he bound him on the back of a camel and,
carrying him to a mountain, left him there. He was at last found by
some who recognised him and gave him meat and drink and acquainted me
with his condition; whereupon I went forth to him and brought him back
to Baghdad where I made him an allowance sufficient to live on. This,
then, O Commander of the Faithful, is the history of my six brothers,
and I feared to go away without relating it all to thee and leave thee
in the error of judging me to be like them. And now thou knowest that I
have six brothers upon my hands and, being more upright than they, I
support the whole family. When the Caliph heard my story and all I told
him concerning my brothers, he laughed and said, "Thou sayest sooth, O
Silent Man! thou art indeed spare of speech nor is there aught of
forwardness in thee; but now go forth out of this city and settle in
some other." And he banished me under edict. I left Baghdad and
travelled in foreign parts till I heard of his death and the accession
of another to the Caliphate. Then I returned to Baghdad where I found
all my brothers dead and chanced upon this young man, to whom I
rendered the kindliest service, for without me he had surely been
killed. Indeed he slanders me and accuses me of a fault which is not in
my nature; and what he reports concerning impudence and meddling and
forwardness is idle and false; for verily on his account I left Baghdad
and travelled about full many a country till I came to this city and
met him here in your company. And was not this, O worthy assemblage, of
the generosity of my nature?


The End of the Tailor’s Tale.


Then quoth the Tailor to the King of China: When we heard the Barber's
tale and saw the excess of his loquacity and the way in which he had
wronged this young man, we laid hands on him and shut him up, after
which we sat down in peace, and ate and drank and enjoyed the good
things of the marriage feast till the time of the call to mid afternoon
prayer, when I left the party and returned home. My wife received me
with sour looks and said, "Thou goest a pleasuring among thy friends
and thou leavest me to sit sorrowing here alone. So now, unless thou
take me abroad and let me have some amusement for the rest of the day,
I will cut the rope[FN#695] and it will be the cause of my separation
from thee." So I took her out and we amused ourselves till supper time,
when we returned home and fell in with this Hunchback who was brimful
of drink and trolling out these rhymes:

"Clear's the wine, the cup's fine; * Like to like they combine:
It is wine and not cup! * 'Tis a cup and not wine!"


So I invited him to sup with us and went out to buy fried fish; after
which we sat down to eat; and presently my wife took a piece of bread
and a fid of fish and stuffed them into his mouth and he choked; and,
though I slapped him long and hard between the shoulders, he died. Then
I carried him off and contrived to throw him into the house of this
leach, the Jew; and the leach contrived to throw him into the house of
the Reeve; and the Reeve contrived to throw him on the way of the
Nazarene broker. This, then, is my adventure which befell me but
yesterday. Is not it more wondrous than the story of the Hunchback?
When the King of China heard the Tailor's tale he shook his head for
pleasure; and, showing great surprise, said, "This that passed between
the young man and the busy-body of a Barber is indeed more pleasant and
wonderful than the story of my lying knave of a Hunchback." Then he
bade one of his Chamberlains go with the Tailor and bring the Barber
out of jail, saying, "I wish to hear the talk of this Silent Man and it
shall be the cause of your deliverance one and all: then we will bury
the Hunchback, for that he is dead since yesterday, and set up a tomb
over him."—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

When it was the Thirty-fourth Night,


She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King of China
bade, "Bring me the Barber who shall be the cause of your deliverance;
then we will bury this Hunchback, for that he is dead since yesterday
and set up a tomb over him." So the Chamberlain and the Tailor went to
the jail and, releasing the Barber, presently returned with him to the
King. The Sultan of China looked at him and considered him carefully
and lo and behold! he was an ancient man, past his ninetieth year;
swart of face, white of beard, and hoar of eyebrows; lop eared and
proboscis-nosed,[FN#696] with a vacant, silly and conceited expression
of countenance. The King laughed at this figure o' fun and said to him,
"O Silent Man, I desire thee to tell me somewhat of thy history." Quoth
the Barber, "O King of the age, allow me first to ask thee what is the
tale of this Nazarene and this Jew and this Moslem and this Hunchback
(the corpse) I see among you? And prithee what may be the object of
this assemblage?" Quoth the King of China, "And why dost thou ask?" "I
ask," he replied, "in order that the King's majesty may know that I am
no forward fellow or busy body or impertinent meddler; and that I am
innocent of their calumnious charges of overmuch talk; for I am he
whose name is the Silent Man, and indeed peculiarly happy is my
sobriquet, as saith the poet:

When a nickname or little name men design, * Know that nature with name
shall full oft combine."


Then said the King, "Explain to the Barber the case of this Hunchback
and what befell him at supper time; also repeat to him the stories told
by the Nazarene, the Jew, the Reeve, and the Tailor; and of no avail to
me is a twice told tale." They did his bidding, and the Barber shook
his head and said, "By Allah, this is a marvel of marvels! Now uncover
me the corpse of yonder Hunchback. They undid the winding sheet and he
sat down and, taking the Hunchback's head in his lap, looked at his
face and laughed and guffaw'd[FN#697] till he fell upon his back and
said, "There is wonder in every death,[FN#698] but the death of this
Hunchback is worthy to be written and recorded in letters of liquid
gold!" The bystanders were astounded at his words and the King
marvelled and said to him, "What ails thee, O Silent Man? Explain to us
thy words !" "O King of the age," said the Barber, "I swear by thy
beneficence that there is still life in this Gobbo Golightly!"
Thereupon he pulled out of his waist belt a barber's budget, whence he
took a pot of ointment and anointed therewith the neck of the Hunchback
and its arteries. Then he took a pair of iron tweezers and, inserting
them into the Hunchback's throat, drew out the fid of fish with its
bone; and, when it came to sight, behold, it was soaked in blood.
Thereupon the Hunchback sneezed a hearty sneeze and jumped up as if
nothing had happened and passing his hand over his face said, "I
testify that there is no god, but the God, and I testify that Mohammed
is the Apostle of God." At this sight all present wondered; the King of
China laughed till he fainted and in like manner did the others. Then
said the Sultan, "By Allah, of a truth this is the most marvellous
thing I ever saw! O Moslems, O soldiers all, did you ever in the lives
of you see a man die and be quickened again? Verily had not Allah
vouchsafed to him this Barber, he had been a dead man!" Quoth they, "By
Allah, 'tis a marvel of marvels." Then the King of China bade record
this tale, so they recorded it and placed it in the royal
muniment-rooms; after which he bestowed costly robes of honour upon the
Jew, the Nazarene and the Reeve, and bade them depart in all esteem.
Then he gave the Tailor a sumptuous dress and appointed him his own
tailor, with suitable pay and allowances; and made peace between him
and the Hunchback, to whom also he presented a splendid and expensive
suit with a suitable stipend. He did as generously with the Barber,
giving him a gift and a dress of honour; moreover he settled on him a
handsome solde and created him Barber surgeon[FN#699] of state and made
him one of his cup companions. So they ceased not to live the most
pleasurable life and the most delectable, till there came to them the
Destroyer of all delights and the Sunderer of all societies, the
Depopulator of palaces and the Garnerer for graves. Yet, O most
auspicious King! (continued Shahrazad) this tale is by no means more
wonderful than that of the two Wazirs and Anís al-Jalís. Quoth her
sister Dunyazad, "And what may that be?", whereupon she began to relate