PART ONE. THE WARRIOR


I. THE LOVE OF ANTELOPE


I

Upon a hanging precipice atop of the Eagle Scout Butte there appeared a
motionless and solitary figure--almost eagle-like he perched! The people
in the camp below saw him, but none looked at him long. They turned
their heads quickly away with a nervous tingling, for the height above
the plains was great. Almost spirit-like among the upper clouds the
young warrior sat immovable.

It was Antelope. He was fasting and seeking a sign from the “Great
Mystery,” for such was the first step of the young and ambitious Sioux
[who wished to be a noted warrior among his people].

He is a princely youth, among the wild Sioux, who hunts for his tribe
and not for himself! His voice is soft and low at the campfire of his
nation, but terror-giving in the field of battle. Such was Antelope’s
reputation. The more he sought the “Great Mystery” in solitude, the more
gentle and retiring he became, and in the same proportion his courage
and manliness grew. None could say that he was not a kind son and a good
hunter, for he had already passed the “two-arrow-to-kill,” his buffalo
examination.

On a hot midsummer morning a few weeks later, while most of the inmates
of the teepees were breakfasting in the open air, the powerful voice of
the herald resounded among the pine-clad heights and green valleys.

“Hear ye, hear ye, warriors!” he chanted loudly. “The council has
decreed that four brave young men must scout the country to the
sunsetward of the camp, for the peace and protection of our people!”

All listened eagerly for the names of the chosen warriors, and in
another moment there came the sonorous call: “Antelope, Antelope! the
council has selected you!”

The camp was large--fully four hundred paces across; but in that
country, in the clear morning air, such an announcement can be heard a
great way, and in the silence that followed the hills repeated over and
over the musical name of Antelope.

In due time the four chosen youths appeared before the council fire.
The oath of the pipe was administered, and each took a few whiffs as
reverently as a Churchman would partake of the sacrament. The chief of
the council, who was old and of a striking appearance, gave the charge
and command to the youthful braves.

There was a score or more of warriors ready mounted to escort them
beyond the precincts of the camp, and the “fearless heart” song was sung
according to the custom, as the four ran lightly from the door of the
council teepee and disappeared in the woods.

It was a peculiarly trying and hazardous moment in which to perform
the duties of a scout. The Sioux were encroaching upon the territory of
hostile tribes, here in the foot-hills of the Big Horn Mountains, and
now and then one of their hunters was cut off by the enemy. If continual
vigilance could not save them, it might soon become necessary to retreat
to their own hunting-grounds.

It was a savage fetish that a warrior must be proof against the alluring
ways of pretty maidens; that he must place his honor far above the
temptations of self-indulgence and indolence. Cold, hunger, and personal
hardship did not count with Antelope when there was required of him
any special exertion for the common good. It was cause to him of secret
satisfaction that the council-men had selected him for a dangerous
service in preference to some of his rivals and comrades.

He had been running for two or three hours at a good, even gait, and had
crossed more than one of the smaller creeks, yet many deep gulches and
bad lands lay between him and the furthest peak that melted into the
blue dome above.

“I shall stand upon the Bear’s Heart,” he said to himself. “If I can
do that, and still report before the others, I shall do well!” His keen
eyes were constantly sweeping the country in his front, and suddenly
he paused and shrank back motionless in a crouching attitude, still
steadily keeping an eye upon a moving object. It was soon evident
that some one was stealthily eying him from behind cover, and he was
outwitted by the enemy! Still stooping, he glided down a little ravine,
and as he reached the bed of the creek there emerged from it a large
gray wolf.

This was very opportune for Antelope. He gave the gray wolf’s
danger-call with all his might; waited an instant and gave it a second
time; then he turned and ran fleetly down the stream. At the same moment
the wolf appeared upon the top of the bank, in full view of the enemy.

“Here he comes!” they whispered, and had their arrows on the string as
the wolf trotted leisurely along, exposing only his head, for this was a
common disguise among the plains Indians. But when he came out into the
open, behold! it was only a gray wolf!

“Ugh!” the Utes grunted, as they looked at each other in much chagrin.

“Surely he was a man, and coming directly into our trap! We sang and
prayed to the gods of war when our war chief sent us ahead to scout the
Sioux people, to find their camp. This is a mystery, a magic! Either he
is a Sioux in disguise, or we don’t know their tricks!” exclaimed the
leader.

Now they gave the war-whoop, and their arrows flew through the air. The
wolf gave a yelp of distress, staggered and fell dead. Instantly they
ran to examine the body, and found it to be truly that of a wolf.

“Either this is a wonderful medicine-man, or we are shamefully fooled by
a Sioux warrior,” they muttered.

They lost several minutes before they caught sight of Antelope, who had
followed the bed of the creek as far as it lay in his direction and then
came out of it at full speed. It would be safer for him to remain in
concealment until dark; but in the meantime the Ute warriors would reach
the camp, and his people were unprepared! It was necessary to expose
himself to the enemy. He knew that it would be chiefly a contest of
speed and he had an excellent start; but on the other hand, the Utes
doubtless had their horses.

“The Sioux who played this trick on us must die to-day!” exclaimed their
leader. “Come, friends, we cannot afford to let him tell this joke on us
at the camp-fires of his people!”

Antelope was headed directly for Eagle Scout Butte, for the camp was in
plain view from the top of this hill. He had run pretty much all day,
but then, that was nothing!

“I shall reach the summit first, unless the Ute horses have wings!” he
said to himself.

Looking over his shoulder, he saw five horsemen approaching, so he
examined his bow and arrows as he ran.

“All is well,” he muttered. “One of their spirits at the least must
guide mine to the spirit land!” where, it was believed by them, there
was no fighting.

Now he was within hearing of their whoops, but he was already at the
foot of the butte. Their horses could not run up the steep ascent, and
they were obliged to dismount. Like a deer the Sioux leaped from rock
to rock, and almost within arrow-shot came his pursuers, wildly whooping
and yelling.

When he had achieved the summit, he took his stand between two great
rocks, and flashed his tiny looking-glass for a distress signal into the
distant camp of his people.

For a long time no reply came, and many arrows flew over his head, as
the Utes approached gradually from rock to rock. He, too, sent down a
swift arrow now and then, to show them that he was no child or woman in
fight, but brave as a bear when it is brought to bay.

“Ho, ho!” he shouted to the enemy, in token of a brave man’s welcome to
danger and death.

They replied with yells of triumph, as they pressed more and more
closely upon him. One of their number had been dispatched to notify the
main war-party when they first saw Antelope, but he did not know this,
and his courage was undiminished. From time to time he continued to
flash his signal, and at last like lightning the little white flash came
in reply.

The sun was low when the besieged warrior discovered a large body of
horsemen approaching from the northwest. It was the Ute warparty! He
looked earnestly once more toward the Sioux camp, shading his eyes with
his right palm. There, too, were many moving specks upon the plain,
drawing toward the foot of the hill!

At the middle of the afternoon they had caught his distress signal, and
the entire camp was thrown into confusion, for but few of the men had
returned from the daily hunt. As fast as they came in, the warriors
hurried away upon their best horses, singing and yelling. When they
reached the well-known butte, towering abruptly in the midst of the
plain, they could distinguish their enemies massed behind the hanging
rocks and scattered cedar-trees, crawling up closer and closer, for the
large warparty reached the hill just as the scouts who held Antelope at
bay discovered the approach of his kinsmen.

Antelope had long since exhausted his quiver of arrows and was gathering
up many of those that fell about him to send them back among his
pursuers. When their attention was withdrawn from him for an instant by
the sudden onset of the Sioux, he sprang to his feet.

He raised both his hands heavenward in token of gratitude for his
rescue, and his friends announced with loud shouts the daring of
Antelope.

Both sides fought bravely, but the Utes at last retreated and were
fiercely pursued. Antelope stood at his full height upon the huge rock
that had sheltered him, and gave his yell of defiance and exultation.
Below him the warriors took it up, and among the gathering shadows the
rocks echoed praises of his name.

In the Sioux camp upon Lost Water there were dances and praise songs,
but there was wailing and mourning, too, for many lay dead among the
crags. The name of Antelope was indelibly recorded upon Eagle Scout
Butte.

“If he wished for a war-bonnet of eagle feathers, it is his to wear,”
 declared one of the young men. “But he is modest, and scarcely even
joins in the scalp dances. It is said of him that he has never yet
spoken to any young woman!”

“True, it is not announced publicly that he has addressed a maiden. Many
parents would like to have their daughters the first one he would speak
to, but I am told he desires to go upon one or two more war-paths before
seeking woman’s company,” replied another.

“Hun, hun, hay!” exclaimed a third youth ill-naturedly. He is already
old enough to be a father!”

“This is told of him,” rejoined the first speaker. “He wants to hold
the record of being the young man who made the greatest number of coups
before he spoke to a maiden. I know that there are not only mothers who
would be glad to have him for a son-in-law, but their young daughters
would not refuse to look upon the brave Antelope as a husband!”

It was true that in the dance his name was often mentioned, and at every
repetition it seemed that the young women danced with more spirit, while
even grandmothers joined in the whirl with a show of youthful abandon.

Wezee, the father of Antelope, was receiving congratulations throughout
the afternoon. Many of the old men came to his lodge to smoke with him,
and the host was more than gratified, for he was of a common family and
had never before known what it is to bask in the sunshine of popularity
and distinction. He spoke complacently as he crowded a handful of
tobacco into the bowl of the long red pipe.

“Friends, our life here is short, and the life of a brave youth is apt
to be shorter than most! We crave all the happiness that we can get, and
it is right that we should do so. One who says that he does not care
for reputation or success, is not likely to be telling the truth. So you
will forgive me if I say too much about the honorable career of my son.”
 This was the old man’s philosophic apology.

“Ho, ho,” his guests graciously responded. “It is your moon! Every moon
has its fullness, when it lights up the night, while the little stars
dance before it. So to every man there comes his full moon!”

Somewhat later in the day all the young people of the great camp were
seen to be moving in one direction. All wore their best attire and
finest ornaments, and even the parti-colored steeds were decorated to
the satisfaction of their beauty-loving riders.

“Ugh, Taluta is making a maidens’ feast! She, the prettiest of all the
Unkpapa maidens!” exclaimed one of the young braves.

“She, the handsomest of all our young women!” repeated another.

Taluta was indeed a handsome maid in the height and bloom of womanhood,
with all that wonderful freshness and magnetism which was developed
and preserved by the life of the wilderness. She had already given five
maidens’ feasts, beginning with her fifteenth year, and her shy and
diffident purity was held sacred by her people.

The maidens’ circle was now complete. Behind it the outer circle of old
women was equally picturesque and even more dignified. The grandmother,
not the mother, was regarded as the natural protector of the young
maiden, and the dowagers derived much honor from their position,
especially upon public occasions, taking to themselves no small amount
of credit for the good reputations of their charges.

Weshawee, whose protege had many suitors and was a decided coquette,
fidgeted nervously and frequently adjusted her robe or fingered
her necklace to ease her mind, for she dreaded lest, in spite of
watchfulness, some mishap might have befallen her charge. Her anxiety
was apparently shared by several other chaperons who stole occasional
suspicious glances in the direction of certain of the young braves.
It had been known to happen that a girl unworthy to join in the sacred
feast was publicly disgraced.

A special police force was appointed to keep order on this occasion,
each member of which was gorgeously painted and bedecked with eagle
feathers, and carried in his hand a long switch with which to threaten
the encroaching throng. Their horses wore head-skins of fierce animals
to add to their awe-inspiring appearance.

The wild youths formed the outer circle of the gathering, attired like
the woods in autumn, their long locks glossy with oil and perfumed with
scented grass and leaves. Many pulled their blankets over their heads as
if to avoid recognition, and loitered shyly at a distance.

Among these last were Antelope and his cousin, Red Eagle. They stood
in the angle formed by the bodies of their steeds, whose noses were
together. The young hero was completely enveloped in his handsome robe
with a rainbow of bead-work acros the middle, and his small moccasined
feet projected from beneath the lower border. Red Eagle held up an
eagle-wing fan, partially concealing his face, and both gazed intently
toward the center of the maidens’ circle.

“Woo! woo!” was the sonorous exclamation of the police, announcing the
beginning of the ceremonies. In the midst of the ring of girls stood the
traditional heart-shaped red stone, with its bristling hedge of arrows.
In this case there were five arrows, indicating that Taluta had already
made as many maidens’ feasts. Each of the maidens must lay her hand upon
the stone in token of her purity and chastity, touching also as many
arrows as she herself has attended maidens’ feasts.

Taluta advanced first to the center. As she stood for a moment beside
the sacred stone, she appeared to the gazing bystanders the embodiment
of grace and modesty. Her gown, adorned with long fringes at the seams,
was beaded in blue and white across the shoulders and half way to her
waist. Her shining black hair was arranged in two thick plaits which
hung down upon her bosom. There was a native dignity in her gestures
and in her utterance of the maidens’ oath, and as she turned to face the
circle, all the other virgins followed her.

When the feast was ended and the gay concourse had dispersed, Antelope
and his cousin were among the last to withdraw. The young man’s eyes had
followed every movement of Taluta as long as she remained in sight,
and it was only when she vanished in the gathering shadows that he was
willing to retire.

In savage courtship, it was the custom to introduce one’s self boldly
to the young lady, although sometimes it was convenient to have a sister
introduce her brother. But Antelope had no sister to perform this office
for him, and if he had had one, he would not have made the request. He
did not choose to admit any one to his secret, for he had no confidence
in himself or in the outcome of the affair. If it had been anything like
trailing the doe, or scouting the Ojibway, he would have ridiculed the
very notion of missing the object sought. But this was a new warfare--an
unknown hunting! Although he was very anxious to meet Taluta, whenever
the idea occurred to him he trembled like a leaf in the wind, and
profuse perspiration rolled down his stoic visage. It was not customary
to hold any social intercourse with the members of the opposite sex,
and he had never spoken familiarly to any woman since he became a man,
except his old grandmother. It was well known that the counsel of the
aged brings luck to the youth in warfare and love.

Antelope arose early the next morning, and without speaking to any one
he made a ceremonious toilet. He put on his finest buckskin shirt and
a handsome robe, threw a beaded quiver over his shoulder, and walked
directly away from the teepees and into the forest--he did not know why
nor whither. The sounds of the camp grew fainter and fainter, until at
last he found himself alone.

“How is it,” mused the young man, “that I have hoped to become a leader
among my people? My father is not a chief, and none of my ancestors were
distinguished in war. I know well that, if I desire to be great, I
must deny myself the pleasure of woman’s company until I have made my
reputation. I must not boast nor exhibit myself on my first success. The
spirits do not visit the common haunts of men! All these rules I have
thus far kept, and I must not now yield to temptation.... Man has
much to weaken his ambition after he is married. A young man may seek
opportunities to prove his worth, but to a married man the opportunity
must come to try him. He acts only when compelled to act.... Ah, I
must flee from the woman!... Besides, if she should like someone else
better, I should be humiliated.... I must go upon a long war-path. I
shall forget her....”

At this point his revery was interrupted by the joyous laughter of
two young women. The melodious sing-song laughter of the Sioux maiden
stirred the very soul of the young warrior.

All his philosophy deserted him, and he stood hesitating, looking about
him as if for a chance of escape. A man who had never before felt the
magnetic influence of woman in her simplicity and childlike purity, he
became for the moment incapable of speech or action.

Meanwhile the two girls were wholly unconscious of any disturbing
presence in the forest. They were telling each other the signals that
each had received in the dance. Taluta’s companion had stopped at the
first raspberry bushes, while she herself passed on to the next thicket.
When she emerged from the pines into an opening, she suddenly beheld
Antelope, in his full-dress suit of courtship. Instantly she dropped her
eyes.

Luckily the customs of courtship among the Sioux allow the covering
of one’s head with the blanket. In this attitude, the young man made a
signal to Taluta with trembling fingers.

The wild red man’s wooing was natural and straightforward; there was no
circumspection, no maneuvering for time or advantage. Hot words of love
burst forth from the young warrior’s lips, with heavy breathing behind
the folds of the robe with which he sought to shield his embarrassment.

“For once the spirits are guiding my fortunes! It may seem strange to
you, when we meet thus by accident, that I should speak immediately of
my love for you; but we live in a world where one must speak when the
opportunity offers. I have thought much of you since I saw you at the
maidens’ feast.... Is Taluta willing to become the wife of Tatoka? The
moccasins of her making will cause his feet to be swift in pursuit of
the game, and on the trail of the enemy.... I beg of you, maiden, let
our meeting be known only to the birds of the air, while you consider my
proposal!”

All this while the maiden stood demurely at his side, playing with
the lariat of her pony in her brown, fine hands. Her doeskin gown with
profuse fringes hung gracefully as the drooping long leaves of the
willow, and her two heavy braids of black hair, mingled with strings
of deers’ hoofs and wampum, fell upon her bosom. There was a faint glow
underneath her brown skin, and her black eyes were calm and soft, yet
full of native fire.

“You will not press for an answer now,” she gently replied, without
looking at him. “I expected to see no one here, and your words have
taken me by surprise.... I grant your last request. The birds alone can
indulge in gossip about our meeting,--unless my cousin, who is in the
next ravine, should see us together!” She sprang lightly upon the back
of her pony, and disappeared among the scattered pines.

Between the first lovers’ meeting and the second was a period of one
moon. This was wholly the fault of Antelope, who had been a prey
to indecision and painful thoughts. Half regretting his impulsive
declaration, and hoping to forget his pangs in the chances of travel and
war, he had finally enlisted in the number of those who were to go with
the war-leader Crowhead into the Ute country. As was the custom of the
Sioux warriors upon the eve of departure, the young men consulted their
spiritual advisers, and were frequently in the purifying vapor-bath, and
fasting in prayer.

The last evening had come, and Antelope was on the way to the top of the
hill behind the camp for a night of prayer. Suddenly in the half-light
he came full upon Taluta, leading her pony down the narrow trail. She
had never looked more beautiful to the youth than at that moment.

“Ho,” he greeted her. She simply smiled shyly.

“It is long since we met,” he ventured.

“I have concluded that you do not care to hear my reply,” retorted the
girl.

“I have nothing to say in my defense, but I hope that you will be
generous. I have suffered much.... You will understand why I stand far
from you,” he added gently. “I have been preparing myself to go upon
the warpath. We start at daylight for the Ute country. Every day for ten
days I have been in the vapor-bath, and ten nights fasting.”

As Taluta well knew, a young warrior under these circumstances dared not
approach a woman, not even his own wife.

“I still urge you to be my wife. Are you ready to give me your answer?”
 continued Antelope.

“My answer was sent to you by your grandmother this very day,” she
replied softly.

“Ah, tell me, tell me,...” pressed the youth eagerly.

“All is well. Fear nothing,” murmured the maiden.

“I have given my word--I have made my prayers and undergone
purification. I must not withdraw from this war-path,” he said after a
silence. “But I know that I shall be fortunate!... My grandmother will
give you my love token.... Ah, kechuwa (dear love)! watch the big star
every night! I will watch it, too--then we shall both be watching!
Although far apart, our spirits will be together.”

The moon had risen above the hill, and the cold light discovered the two
who stood sadly apart, their hearts hot with longing. Reluctantly, yet
without a backward look or farewell gesture, the warrior went on up the
hill, and the maiden hurried homeward. Only a few moments before she had
been happy in the anticipation of making her lover happy. The truth
was she had been building air-castles in the likeness of a white teepee
pitched upon a virgin prairie all alone, surrounded by mountains.
Tatoka’s war-horse and hunting pony were picketed near by, and there she
saw herself preparing the simple meal for him! But now he has clouded
her dreams by this untimely departure.

“He is too brave.... His life will be a short one,” she said to herself
with foreboding.

For a few hours all was quiet, and just before the appearance of day the
warriors’ departure was made known by their farewell songs. Antelope
was in the line early, but he was heavy of heart, for he knew that his
sweetheart was sorely puzzled and disappointed by his abrupt departure.
His only consolation was the knowledge that he had in his bundle a pair
of moccasins made by her hands. He had not yet seen them, because it was
the custom not to open any farewell gifts until the first camp was made,
and then they must be opened before the eyes of all the young men! It
brings luck to the war-party, they said. He would have preferred to keep
his betrothal secret, but there was no escaping the custom.

All the camp-fires were burning and supper had been eaten, when the
herald approached every group and announced the programme for the
evening. It fell to Antelope to open his bundle first. Loud laughter
pealed forth when the reluctant youth brought forth a superb pair of
moccasins--the recognized lovegift! At such times the warriors’ jokes
were unmerciful, for it was considered a last indulgence in jesting,
perhaps for many moons. The recipient was well known to be a novice
in love, and this token first disclosed the fact that he had at last
succumbed to the allurements of woman. When he sang his love-song he was
obliged to name the giver of the token, and many a disappointed suitor
was astonished to hear Taluta’s name.

It was a long journey to the Ute country, and when they reached it there
was a stubbornly contested fight. Both sides claimed the victory, and
both lost several men. Here again Antelope was signally favored by the
gods of war. He counted many coups or blows, and exhibited his bravery
again and again in the charges, but he received no wound.


On the return journey Taluta’s beautiful face was constantly before
him. He was so impatient to see her that he hurried on in advance of his
party, when they were still several days’ travel from the Sioux camp.

“This time I shall join in all the dances and participate in the
rejoicings, for she will surely like to have me do so,” he thought to
himself. “She will join also, and I know that none is a better dancer
than Taluta!”

In fancy, Antelope was practicing the songs of victory as he rode alone
over the vast wild country.

He had now passed Wild Horse Creek and the Black Hills lay to the
southeast, while the Big Horn range loomed up to the north in gigantic
proportions. He felt himself at home.

“I shall now be a man indeed. I shall have a wife!” he said aloud.

At last he reached the point from which he expected to view the distant
camp. Alas, there was no camp there! Only a solitary teepee gleamed
forth upon the green plain, which was almost surrounded by a quick turn
of the River of Deep Woods. The teepee appeared very white. A peculiar
tingling sensation passed through his frame, and the pony whinnied often
as he was urged forward at a gallop.

When Antelope beheld the solitary teepee he knew instantly what it was.
It was a grave! Sometimes a new white lodge was pitched thus for
the dead, who lay in state within upon a couch of finest skins, and
surrounded by his choicest possessions.

Antelope’s excitement increased as he neared the teepee, which was
protected by a barricade of thick brush. It stood alone and silent in
the midst of the deserted camp. He kicked the sides of his tired horse
to make him go faster. At last he jumped from the saddle and ran
toward the door. There he paused for a moment, and at the thought of
desecrating a grave, a cold terror came over him.

“I must see--I must see!” he said aloud, and desperately he broke
through the thorny fence and drew aside the oval swinging door.


II

In the stately white teepee, seen from afar, both grave and monument,
there lay the fair body of Taluta! The bier was undisturbed, and the
maiden looked beautiful as if sleeping, dressed in her robes of ceremony
and surrounded by all her belongings.

Her lover looked upon her still face and cried aloud. “Hey, hey, hey!
Alas! alas! If I had known of this while in the Ute country, you would
not be lonely on the spirit path.”

He withdrew, and laid the doorflap reverently back in its place. How
long he stood without the threshold he could not tell. He stood with
head bowed down upon his breast, tearless and motionless, utterly
oblivious to everything save the bier of his beloved. His charger grazed
about for a long time where he had left him, but at last he endeavored
by a low whinny to attract his master’s attention, and Antelope awoke
from his trance of sorrow.

The sun was now hovering over the western ridges. The mourner’s throat
was parched, and perspiration rolled down his cheeks, yet he was
conscious of nothing but a strong desire to look upon her calm, sweet
face once more.

He kindled a small fire a little way off, and burned some cedar berries
and sweet-smelling grass. Then he fumigated himself thoroughly to dispel
the human atmosphere, so that the spirit might not be offended by his
approach, for he greatly desired to obtain a sign from her spirit.
He had removed his garments and stood up perfectly nude save for the
breechclout. His long hair was unbraided and hung upon his shoulders,
veiling the upper half of his splendid body. Thus standing, the lover
sang a dirge of his own making. The words were something like this:


   Ah, spirit, thy flight is mysterious!

   While the clouds are stirred by our wailing,

   And our tears fall faster in sorrow--


   While the cold sweat of night benumbs us,

   Thou goest alone on thy journey,

   In the midst of the shining star people!


   Thou goest alone on thy journey--

   Thy memory shall be our portion;

   Until death we must watch for the spirit!


The eyes of Antelope were closed while he chanted the dirge. He sang it
over and over, pausing between the lines, and straining as it were every
sense lest he might not catch the rapt whisper of her spirit, but only
the distant howls of coyotes answered him. His body became cold and numb
from sheer exhaustion, and at last his knees bent under him and he sank
down upon the ground, still facing the teepee. Unconsciousness overtook
him, and in his sleep or trance the voice came:

“Do not mourn for me, my friend! Come into my teepee, and eat of my
food.”

It seemed to Antelope that he faltered for a moment; then he entered
the teepee. There was a cheerful fire burning in the center. A basin
of broiled buffalo meat was placed opposite the couch of Taluta, on the
other side of the fire. Its odor was delicious to him, yet he hesitated
to eat of it.

“Fear not, kechuwa (my darling)! It will give you strength,” said the
voice.

The maid was natural as in life. Beautifully attired, she sat up on her
bed, and her demeanor was cheerful and kind.

The young man ate of the food in silence and without looking at the
spirit. “Ho, kechuwa!” he said to her when returning the dish, according
to the custom of his people.

Silently the two sat for some minutes, while the youth gazed into the
burning embers.

“Be of good heart,” said Taluta, at last, “for you shall meet my twin
spirit! She will love you as I do, and you will love her as you love me.
This was our covenant before we came into this world.”

The conception of a “twin spirit” was familiar to the Sioux. “Ho,”
 responded the warrior, with dignity and all seriousness. He felt a great
awe for the spirit, and dared not lift his eyes to her face.

“Weep no more, kechuwa, weep no more,” she softly added; and the next
moment Antelope found himself outside the mysterious teepee. His limbs
were stiff and cold, but he did not feel faint nor hungry. Having filled
his pipe, he held it up to the spirits and then partook of the smoke;
and thus revived, he slowly and reluctantly left the sacred spot.

The main war-party also visited the old camp and saw the solitary teepee
grave, but did not linger there. They continued on the trail of
the caravan until they reached the new camping ground. They called
themselves successful, although they had left several of their number
on the field. Their triumph songs indicated this; therefore the people
hurried to receive the news and to learn who were the unfortunates.

The father of Antelope was foremost among those who ran to meet the
war-party. He learned that his son had distinguished himself in the
fight, and that his name was not mentioned among the brave dead.

“And where, then, is he?” he asked, with unconcealed anxiety.

“He left us three days ago to come in advance,” they replied.

“But he has not arrived!” exclaimed old Wezee, in much agitation.

He returned to his teepee, where he consoled himself as best he could by
smoking the pipe in solitude. He could neither sing praises nor indulge
in the death dirge, and none came in either to congratulate or mourn
with him.

The sun had disappeared behind the hills, and the old man still sat
gazing into the burning embers, when he heard a horse’s footfall at the
door of his lodge.

“Ho, atay (father)!” came the welcome call.

“Mechinkshe! mechinkshe!” (my son, my son), he replied in unrestrained
joy. Old Wezee now stood on the threshold and sang the praise song for
his son, ending with a warwhoop such as he had not indulged in since he
was quite a young man.

The camp was once more alive with the dances, and the dull thud of the
Indian drum was continually in the air. The council had agreed that
Antelope was entitled to wear a war-bonnet of eagles’ feathers. He was
accordingly summoned before the aboriginal parliament, and from the wise
men of the tribe he received his degree of war-bonnet.

It was a public ceremony. The great pipe was held up for him to take the
smoke of high honor.

The happiest person present was the father of Antelope; but he himself
remained calm and unmoved throughout the ceremony.

“He is a strange person,” was the whisper among a group of youths who
were watching the proceedings with envious eyes.

The young man was strangely listless and depressed in spirit. His old
grandmother knew why, but none of the others understood. He never joined
in the village festivities, while the rest of his family were untiring
in the dances, and old Wezee was at the height of his happiness.

It was a crisp October morning, and the family were eating their
breakfast of broiled bison meat, when the large drum at the council
lodge was struck three times. The old man set down his wooden basin.

“Ah, my son, the war-chiefs will make an announcement! It may be a call
for the enlistment of warriors! I am sorry,” he said, and paused. “I
am sorry, because I would rather no war-party went out at present. I
am getting old. I have enjoyed your success, my son. I love to hear the
people speak your name. If you go again upon the war-path, I shall no
longer be able to join in the celebrations. Something tells me that you
will not return!”

Young braves were already on their way to the council lodge. Tatoka
looked, and the temptation was great.

“Father, it is not becoming for me to remain at home when others go,” he
said, at last.

“Ho,” was the assent uttered by the father, with a deep sigh.

“Five hundred braves have enlisted to go with the great war prophet
against the three confederated tribes,” he afterward reported at home,
with an air of elation which he had not worn for some moons.

Since Antelope had received the degree of war-bonnet, his father had
spared neither time nor his meager means in his behalf. He had bartered
his most cherished possessions for several eagles that were brought
in by various hunters of the camp, and with his own hands had made a
handsome war-bonnet for his son.

“You will now wear a war-bonnet for the first time, and you are the
first of our family who has earned the right to wear one for many
generations. I am proud of you, my son,” he said as he presented it.

But when the youth replied: “Ho, ho, father! I ought to be a brave man
in recognition of this honor,” he again sighed heavily.

“It is that I feared, my son! Many a young man has lost his life for
vanity and love of display!”

The evening serenades began early, for the party was to leave at once.
In groups upon their favorite ponies the warriors rode around the inner
circle of the great camp, singing their war-songs. All the people came
out of the teepees, and sitting by twos and threes upon the ground,
bedecked with savage finery, they watched and listened. The pretty wild
maidens had this last opportunity given them to look upon the faces of
their sweethearts, whom they might never see again. Here and there
an old man was singing the gratitude song or thank-offering, while
announcing the first warpath of a novice, for such an announcement meant
the giving of many presents to the poor and aged. So the camp was filled
with songs of joy and pride in the departing husbands, brothers, and
sons.

As soon as darkness set in the sound of the rude native flute was added
to the celebration. This is the lover’s farewell. The young braves,
wrapped from head to foot in their finest robes, each sounded the
plaintive strains near the teepee of the beloved. The playful yodeling
of many voices in chorus was heard at the close of each song.

At midnight the army of five hundred, the flower of the Sioux, marched
against their ancient enemy. Antelope was in the best of spirits. He had
his war-bonnet to display before the enemy! He was now regarded as one
of the foremost warriors of his band, and might probably be asked to
perform some specially hazardous duty, so that he was fully prepared to
earn further distinction.

In five days the Sioux were encamped within a day’s travel of the
permanent village of the confederated tribes--the Rees, Mandans, and
Gros Ventres. The war-chief selected two men, Antelope and Eaglechild,
to scout at night in advance of the main force. It was thought that most
of the hunters had already returned to their winter quarters, and in
this case the Sioux would have no mean enemy to face. On the other hand,
a battle was promised that would enlarge their important traditions.

The two made their way as rapidly as possible toward the ancestral home
of their enemies. It was a night perfectly suited to what they had to
do, for the moon was full, the fleeting clouds hiding it from time to
time and casting deceptive shadows.

When they had come within a short distance of the lodges unperceived,
they lay flat for a long time, and studied the ways of the young men in
every particular, for it was Antelope’s plan to enter the great village
and mingle boldly with its inhabitants. Even their hoots and love-calls
were carefully noted, so that they might be able to imitate them.
There were several entertainments in progress in different parts of the
village, yet it was apparent that the greatest vigilance was observed.
The lodges of poles covered with earth were partly underground, and at
one end the war-horses were stabled, as a precaution against a possible
surprise.

At the moment that a large cloud floated over the moon, casting a
shadow large enough to cover the entire village, the drum in one of the
principal lodges was struck in quick time, accompanied by boisterous
war-whoops and singing. The two scouts adjusted their robes about them
in the fashion of the strangers, and walked openly in that direction.

They glanced quickly from side to side as they approached, but no one
paid any attention, so they came up with other young men and peeped
through the chinks in the earth wigwam. It was a great gambling party.
Among the guests were several distinguished warriors, and each at an
opportune time would rise and recount his great deeds in warfare against
the Sioux. The strangers could read their gestures, and Antelope was
once or twice almost on the point of stringing his bow to send an arrow
through the audacious speaker.

As they moved about the village, taking note of its numbers and
situation, and waiting an opportunity to withdraw without exciting
suspicion, they observed some of the younger braves standing near
another large wigwam, and one or two even peeped within. Moved by sudden
curiosity, Antelope followed their example. He uttered a low exclamation
and at once withdrew.

“What is it?” asked his companion, but received no answer.

It was evidently the home of a chief. The family were seated within at
their usual occupations, and the bright light of the central fire shone
full upon the face of a most lovely maiden.

Antelope stood apparently motionless, but he was trembling under his
robe like a leaf.

“Come, friend, there is another large cloud almost over the moon! We
must move away under its concealing shadow,” urged Eaglechild.

The other stood still as if undecided, but at last he approached the
lodge and looked in a second time. There sat his sweetheart in human
form once more! The maiden was attired in a doeskin gown set with elk’s
teeth like ivory. Her eyes were cast down demurely over her embroidery,
but in every feature she was the living counterpart of Taluta!

At last the two got away unobserved, and hastened toward the place where
they had concealed their horses. But here Antelope sent his companion on
in advance, making the excuse that he wished to study further the best
position from which to make the attack.

When he was left alone he stood still for a moment to decide upon a
plan. He could think of nothing but that he must meet the Ree maiden
before daylight! He realized the extreme hazard of the attempt, but he
also recalled what he had been told by the spirit of Taluta, and the
supernatural command seemed to justify him even in going thus upon the
eve of battle to meet the enemy of his people.

He skirted the heavy timber and retraced his steps to a point from which
he could see the village. The drum of the gambling party had ceased with
the shouts and laughter of the players. Apparently the village was lost
in slumber. The moon had set, and without pausing he advanced to the
home of the girl. As he came near some dogs began to bark, but he
silenced them after the manner of the Rees, and they obeyed him.

When Antelope softly raised the robe that hung over the entrance to the
chief’s lodge, he saw the fire smoldering in the center, and the members
of the household lying in their respective places, all seemingly in a
deep sleep. The girl lay opposite the entrance, where he had seen her
seated in the early part of the evening.

The heart of the Sioux beat violently, and he glanced nervously to left
and right. There was neither sound nor movement. Then he pulled his robe
completely over his head, after the fashion of a Ree lover, and softly
entered the wigwam.

The Ree maiden, having industriously worked on her embroidery until far
into the night, had retired to rest. In her dreams, the twin sister came
to her of whom she had had visions ever since she could remember, and
especially when something of importance was about to happen.

This time she came with a handsome young man of another tribe, and said:
“Sister, I bring you a Sioux, who will be your husband!”

The dreamer opened her eyes to behold a youth bending over her and
gently pulling her robe, as a suitor is permitted to do to awaken his
beloved.

When he saw that she was awake, the Sioux touched his breast, saying in
a whisper, “Tatoka,” and made the sign for Antelope. This pleased the
Ree girl, for her own brother, who had died the year before, had borne
that name. She immediately sat up and stirred the embers into a light
blaze. Then she took hold of his blanket and drew it from his face; and
there she seemed to see the very features of the man of her vision!

He took her hand in his, and she felt the force of love stream through
his long, nervous fingers, and instinctively knew his thoughts. In her
turn she touched her breast and made the sign for Shield, pronouncing in
her own tongue the word, Stasu. This seemed to him also a name of good
omen, and in the sign language which was common to all the people of the
plains, he asked her to be his wife.

Vividly her dream came back to her, and she could not refuse the
stranger. Her soul already responded to his; and for a few minutes they
sat silently side by side. When he arose and beckoned, “Come with me,”
 she had no question to make, and without a word she followed him from
her father’s lodge and out into the forest.


In the midst of his ascending fame, at a moment when opportunity seemed
to favor his ambition, the brave Antelope had mysteriously disappeared!
His companion scout returned with a favorable report. He said that the
men of the three confederated tribes were gambling and feasting, wholly
unconscious of danger, and that Antelope would follow him with a further
report upon the best point of attack. The red warriors impatiently
awaited his return, until it became apparent that they could wait no
longer without sacrificing their chance of success. When the attack was
made it was already rather late. The sun had fairly cleared the eastern
hills, and most of the men were outside their lodges.

It was a great battle! Again and again the Sioux were repulsed, but
as often they rallied and repeated the charge until sundown, when they
effected their retreat with considerable loss. Had Antelope returned
in due season, the charge would have been made before dawn, while the
people were yet asleep.

When the battle was over, the Rees, Mandans, and Gros Ventres gathered
their dead and wounded. The night was filled with mourning. Soon the sad
news was heralded throughout the camp that the beautiful daughter of the
Ree chief was among the missing. It was supposed that she must have been
captured while driving her ponies to water in the early morning. The
grief for her loss was mingled with horror, because of a fear that she
might suffer humiliation at the hands of the Sioux warriors, and among
the young men there were muttered threats that the Sioux would pay
dearly for this.

Though partially successful, the Sioux had lost many of their bravest
warriors, and none could tell what had happened to Antelope--he who had
been believed the favorite of the gods of war. It was suggested by some
envious ones that perhaps he had recognized the strongly entrenched
position of the three tribes, and believing the battle would be a
disastrous one, had set out for home without making his report. But this
supposition was not deemed credible. On the other hand, the idea was
entertained that he had reentered the village, was detected and slain;
and therefore the enemy was on the lookout when the attack was made.

“Hay, hay, hay, mechinkshe (Alas, alas, my son)!” was the sorrowful
cry with which his old father received the news. His head fell upon his
breast, and all the others groaned in sympathy.

The sunset sky was a blanket of beautiful painting. There were
camp-fires among the clouds in orange and scarlet, while some were black
as night. So the camp fairly glowed in celebration of its heroes; yet
there was deep grief in many families. When the evening meal had been
eaten and the people were sitting outside their lodges, a tall old
man, almost nude, appeared in the circle, riding a fine horse. He had
blackened his face, his hair was cut short, and the horse also had been
deprived of his flowing mane and tail. Both were in deep mourning, after
the fashion of the Sioux.

“Ho ho!” exclaimed many warriors as he passed them, singing in a hoarse,
guttural voice.

“Ugh, he sings a war-song!” remarked one.

“Yes, I am told that he will find his son’s bones, or leave his own in
the country of the enemy!”


The rain had fallen incessantly for two days. The fleeing lovers had
reached this lonely mountain valley of the Big Horn region on the night
that the cold fall rains set in, and Antelope had hurriedly constructed
an arbor house or rude shelter of pine and cedar boughs.

It was enough. There they sat, man and wife, in their first home of
living green! The cheerful fire was burning in the center, and the happy
smoke went straight up among the tall pines. There was no human eye
to gaze upon them to embarrass--not even a common language in which to
express their love for one another.

Their marriage, they believed, was made by a spirit, and it was holy in
their minds. Each had cast away his people and his all for the sake of
this emotion which had suddenly overtaken them both with overwhelming
force, and the warrior’s ambition had disappeared before it like a
morning mist before the sun.

To them a new life was just beginning, and they had all but forgotten
the existence of any world save this. The young bride was enshrined in a
bower of spicy fragrance, and her face shone whenever her eyes met those
of her husband.

“This is as I would have it, kechuwa (darling)!” exclaimed the Sioux in
his own language. She simply responded with a childlike smile. Although
she did not understand his words, she read in the tones of his voice
only happy and loving thoughts.

The Ree girl had prepared a broiled bison steak, and her husband was
keeping the fire well fed with dry fagots. The odor of the buming fat
was delicious, and the gentle patter of the rain made a weird music
outside their wigwam.

As soon as her husband had left her alone--for he must go to water the
ponies and conceal them at a distance--Stasu came out to collect more
wood. Instinctively she looked all about her. Huge mountains towered
skyward, clad in pines. The narrow valley in which she was wound its way
between them, and on every side there was heavy forest.

She stood silent and awed, scarcely able to realize that she had
begun her new life absolutely alone, with no other woman to advise or
congratulate her, and visited only by the birds of the air. Yet all the
world to her just now was Antelope! No other woman could smile on him.
He could not talk to any one but her. The evening drum at the council
lodge could not summon him away from her, and she was well content.

When the young wife had done everything she could think of in
preparation for her husband’s return, including the making of several
birch-bark basins and pails for water, the rain had quite ceased, so
she spread her robe just outside the lodge and took up her work-bag, in
which she had several pairs of moccasin-tops already beaded.

While she bent over her work, getting up from time to time to turn the
roast which she had impaled upon a sharp stick above the glowing coals,
the bride had a stream of shy callers, of the little people of the
woods. She sat very still, so as not to startle them, and there is much
curiosity among these people concerning a stranger.

Presently she was startled by a footfall not unlike that of a man. She
had not been married long enough to know the sound of her husband’s
step, and she felt a thrill of joy and fear alternately. It might be he,
and it might be a stranger! She was loath to look up, but at last gave
a furtive glance, and met squarely the eyes of a large grizzly bear, who
was seated upon his haunches not far away.

Stasu was surprised, but she showed no fear; and fearlessness is the
best shield against wild animals. In a moment she got up unconcernedly,
and threw a large piece of meat to the stranger.

“Take of my wedding feast, O great Bear!” she addressed him, “and be
good to me to bless my first teepee! O be kind and recognize my brave
act in taking for my husband one of the warriors of the Sioux, the
ancient enemy of my people! I have accepted a husband of a language
other than mine, and am come to live among you as your neighbor. I offer
you my friendship!”

The bear’s only answer to her prayer was a low growl, but having eaten
the meat, he turned and clumsily departed.

In the meantime Antelope had set himself to master the geography of that
region, to study the outlook for game, and ascertain the best approaches
to their secret home. It was already settled in his mind that he
could never return either to his wife’s people or to his own. His
fellow-warriors would not forgive his desertion, and the Rees could not
be expected to welcome as a kinsman one of the foremost of their ancient
foes. There was nothing to be done but to remain in seclusion, and let
them say what they would of him!

He had loved the Ree maiden from the first moment he beheld her by the
light of the blazing embers, and that love must satisfy him. It was
well that he had never cared much for company, but had spent many of his
young days in solitude and fasting. It did not seem at all strange to
him that he had been forced to retreat into an unknown and wild country
with a woman whom he saw in the evening for the first time, and fled
with as his own wife before sunrise!

By the afternoon he had thoroughly informed himself upon the nature of
the surrounding country. Everything on the face of the map was surveyed
and charted in his mind, in accordance with his habits and training.
This done, he turned toward his secret dwelling. As he walked rapidly
and noiselessly through the hidden valleys and along the singing
streams, he noticed fresh signs of the deer, elk, and other wild tribes
among whom he had chosen to abide. “They shall be my people,” he said to
himself.

Behind a group of cedars he paused to reconnoiter, and saw the
pine-bough wigwam like a giant plant, each row of boughs overlapping
the preceding circular row like the scales of a fish. Stasu was sitting
before it upon a buffalorobe, attired in her best doeskin gown. Her
delicate oval face was touched with red paint, and her slender brown
hands were occupied with a moccasin meant for him to wear. He could
scarcely believe that it was a mortal woman that he saw before him
in broad day--the pride of No Man’s Trail, for that is what the Crow
Indians call that valley!

“Ho, ho, kechuwa!” he exclaimed as he approached her, and her heart
leaped in recognition of the magnetic words of love.

“It is good that we are alone! I shall never want to go back to my
people so long as I have you. I can dwell here with you forever,
unless you should think otherwise!” she exclaimed in her own tongue,
accompanied by graphic signs.

“Ho, I think of nothing else! I can see in every creature only friendly
ways and good feeling. We can live alone here, happily, unless you
should feel differently,” he replied in his own language with the signs,
so that his bride understood him.

The environment was just what it should be when two people are united in
marriage. The wedding music was played by Nature, and trees, brooks,
and the birds of the air contributed their peculiar strains to a great
harmony. All of the people on No Man’s Trail were polite, and understood
the reserves of love. These two had yielded to a simple and natural
impulse; but its only justification to their minds was the mysterious
leading of the twin spirit! That was the sum total of their excuse, and
it was enough.

Before the rigor of winter had set in, Tatoka brought to his bride
many buffalo skins. She was thoroughly schooled in the arts of savage
womanhood; in fact, every Indian maid was trained with this thought
in view--that she should become a beautiful, strong, skillful wife and
mother--the mother of a noble race of warriors!

In a short time within that green and pine-scented enclosure there smiled
a little wild paradise. Hard by the pine-bough wigwam there stood a new
white buffalo-skin teepee, tanned, cut, sewed, and pitched by the hands
of Stasu. Away in the woods, down by the rushing brook, was her tannery,
and not far away, in a sunny, open spot, she prepared her sun-cured
meats for winter use. Her kitchen was a stone fireplace in a shady spot,
and her parlor was the lodge of evergreen, overhung on two sides by
inaccessible ledges, and bounded on the other two by the sparkling
stream. It was a secret place, and yet a citadel; a silent place, and
yet not lonely!

The winter was cold and long, but the pair were happy in one another’s
company, and accepted their strange lot as one that was chosen for them
by the spirits. Stasu had insisted upon her husband speaking to her in
his own language, that she might learn it quickly. In a little while she
was able to converse with him, and when she had acquired his language
she taught him hers.

While Antelope was occupied with hunting and exploring the country,
always keeping in mind the danger of discovery by some wandering scout
or hunter, his wife grew well acquainted with the wild inhabitants of
No Man’s Trail. These people are as full of curiosity as man, and as the
Sioux never hunted near his home, they were entirely fearless. Many came
to the door of Stasu’s lodge, and she was not afraid, but offered them
food and spoke to them kindly. All animals judge by signs and are
quick in reading tones and gestures; so that the Ree girl soon had
grandfathers and grandmothers, after the Indian fashion, among the
wolves and bears that came oftenest for food.

Her husband in the field had also his fellow-hunters and friends. When
he killed the buffalo he always left enough meat for the wolves, the
eagles, and the ravens to feast upon, and these watched for the coming
of the lonely wild man. More than once they told him by their actions of
the presence of a distant campfire, but in each instance it proved to be
a small war-party which had passed below them on the trail.

Again it was summer. Never had the mountains looked grander or more
mysterious to the eyes of the two. The valley was full of the music
and happiness of the winged summer people; the trees wore their summer
attire, and the meadow its green blanket. There were many homes made
happy by the coming of little people everywhere, but no pair was happier
than Stasu and her husband when one morning they saw their little
brave lying wrapped in soft deerskins, and heard for the first time his
plaintive voice!

That morning, when Antelope set out on the hunt, he stopped at the
stream and looked at himself seriously to see whether he had changed
since the day before. He must now appear much graver, he said to
himself, because he is the father of a new man!

In spite of himself, his thoughts were with his own people, and he
wondered what his old grandmother would have said to his child! He
looked away off toward the Black Hills, to the Sioux country, and in his
heart he said, “I am a coward!”

The boy grew naturally, and never felt the lack of playmates and
companions, for his mother was ingenious in devising plays for him, and
in winning for him the confidence and kindness of the animal friends. He
was the young chief and the hero of No Man’s Trail! The bears and wolves
were his warriors; the buffalo and elk the hostile tribes upon whom he
went to war. Small as he was, he soon preferred to roam alone in the
woods. His parents were often anxious, but, on the other hand, they
entertained the hope that he would some day be “wakan,” a mysterious or
supernatural man, for he was getting power from his wild companions and
from the silent forces of nature.

One day, when he was about five years old, he gave a dance for his wild
pets upon the little plateau which was still their home. He had clothed
Mato, the bear, in one of his father’s suits as a great medicine-man.
Waho, the wolf, was painted up as a brave; and the young buffalo calf
was attired in one of his mother’s gowns. The boy acted as chief and
master of ceremonies.

The savage mother watched him with undisguised pride, mingled with
sorrow. Tears coursed down her dusky cheeks, although at the same time
she could not help laughing heartily at the strange performance. When
the play was ended, and she had served the feast at its close, Stasu
seemed lost in thought.

“He should not live in this way,” she was saying to herself. “He should
know the traditions and great deeds of my people! Surely his grandfather
would be proud of the boy!”

That evening, while the boy slept, and Mato lay outside the lodge
eagerly listening and sniffing the night air, the parents sat silent and
ill at ease. After a long time Stasu spoke her mind.

“My husband, you ask me why I am sad. It is because I think that the
Great Mystery will be displeased if we keep this little boy forever in
the wilderness. It is wrong to allow him to grow up among wild animals;
and if sickness or accident should deprive him of his father and mother,
our spirits would never rest, because we had left him alone! I have
decided to ask you to take us back, either to your people or to my
people. We must sacrifice our pride, or, if needs be, our lives, for his
life and happiness!”

This speech of Stasu’s was a surprise to her husband. His eyes rested
upon the ground as he listened, and his face assumed the proverbial
stoical aspect, yet in it there was not lacking a certain nobleness. At
last he lifted his eyes to hers, and said:

“You have spoken wise words, and it shall be as you have said. We shall
return to your people. If I am to die at the hands of the ancient enemy
of the Sioux, I shall die because of my love for you, and for our child.
But I cannot go back to my own people to be ridiculed by unworthy young
men for yielding to love of a Ree maiden!”

There was much feeling behind these words of Antelope. The rigid customs
of his people are almost a religion, and there is one thing above
all else which a Sioux cannot bear--that is the ridicule of his
fellow-warriors. Yes, he can endure severe punishment or even death at
the hands of the enemy rather than a single laugh of derision from a
Sioux!

In a few days the household articles were packed, and the three sadly
turned their backs upon their home. Stasu and her husband were very
silent as they traveled slowly along. When they reached the hill called
“Born-of-Day,” and she saw from its summit the country of her people
lying below her, she cried aloud, weeping happy tears. Antelope sat near
by with bowed head, silently smoking.

Finally on the fifth day they arrived within sight of the great
permanent village of the three tribes. They saw the earth lodges as
of old, thickly clustered along the flats of the Missouri, among their
rustling maize-fields. Antelope stopped. “I think you had better give
me something to eat, woman,” he said, smiling. It was the Sioux way of
saying, “Let me have my last meal!”

After they had eaten, Stasu opened her buckskin bags and gave her
husband his finest suit. He dressed himself carefully in the fashion
of his tribe, putting on all the feathers to which he was entitled as
a warrior. The boy also was decked out in gala attire, and Stasu, the
matron, had never looked more beautiful in her gown of ceremony with the
decoration of elks’ teeth, the same that she had worn on the evening of
her disappearance.

As she dressed herself, the unwelcome thought forced itself upon
her,--“What if my love is killed by my own countrymen in their frenzy?
This beautiful gown must then give place to a poor one, and this hair
will be cut short!” for such is the mourning of the widow among her
people.

The three rode openly down the long slope, and were instantly discovered
by the people of the village. Soon the plain was black with the
approaching riders. Stasu had begged her husband to remain behind, while
she went on alone with the boy to obtain forgiveness, but he sternly
refused, and continued in advance. When the foremost Ree warriors came
within arrow-shot they began to shoot, to which he paid no attention.

But the child screamed with terror, and Stasu cried out in her own
tongue:

“Do not shoot! I am the daughter of your chief!”

One of them returned the reply: “She is killed by the Sioux!” But when
the leaders saw her plainly they were astounded.

For a time there was great confusion. Some held that they should all
die, for the woman had been guilty of treason to her people, and even
now she might be playing a trick upon them. Who could say that behind
that hill there was not a Sioux war-party?

“No, no,” replied others. “They are in our power. Let them tell their
story!”

Stasu told it simply, and said in conclusion:

“This man, one of the bravest and most honorable men of his tribe,
deserted on the night of the attack, and all because he loved a
Ree maiden! He now comes to be your brother-in-law, who will fight
henceforth for you and with you, even if it be against his own people.

“He does not beg for mercy--he can dare anything! But I am a woman--my
heart is soft--I ask for the lives of my husband and my son, who is the
grandson of your chief!”

“He is a coward who touches this man!” exclaimed the leader, and a
thunder of warwhoops went up in approval of his words.

The warriors formed themselves in two great columns, riding twenty
abreast, behind and in front of the strangers. The old chief came out to
meet them, and took his son-inlaw’s hand. Thus they entered the village
in battle array, but with hearts touched with wonder and great gladness,
discharging their arrows upward in clouds and singing peace-songs.


II. THE MADNESS OF BALD EAGLE

“It was many years ago, when I was only a child,” began White Ghost,
the patriarchal old chief of the Yanktonnais Sioux, “that our band was
engaged in a desperate battle with the Rees and Mandans. The cause of
the fight was a peculiar one. I will tell you about it.” And he laid
aside his longstemmed pipe and settled himself to the recital.

“At that time the Yanktonnais numbered a little over forty families.
We were nicknamed by the other bands Shunkikcheka, or Domestic Dogs,
because of our owning large numbers of these animals. My father was the
head chief.

“Our favorite wintering place was a timbered tract near the mouth of the
Grand River, and it was here that we met the Blackfoot Sioux in the fall
hunt. On the opposite side of the river from our camp was the permanent
village of the Rees and Mandans, whose houses were of dirt and partly
underground. For a hundred years before this time they had planted
large gardens, and we were accustomed to buy of them corn, beans, and
pumpkins. From time to time our people had made treaties of peace with
them. Each family of the Rees had one or two buffalo boats--not round,
as the Sioux made them, but two or three skins long. In these boats they
brought quantities of dried beans and other vegetables to trade with us
for jerked buffalo meat.

“It was a great gathering and a time of general festivity and
hospitality. The Sioux young men were courting the Ree girls, and the
Ree braves were courting our girls, while the old people bartered their
produce. All day the river was alive with canoes and its banks rang with
the laughter of the youths and maidens.

“My father’s younger brother, whose name was Big Whip, had a close
friend, a young man who ever after the event of which I am about to tell
you was known as Bald Eagle. They were both daring young men and very
ambitious for distinction. They had been following the Ree girls to
their canoes as they returned to their homes in the evening.

“Big Whip and his friend stood upon the river bank at sunset, one with a
quiver full of arrows upon his back while the other carried a gun under
his blanket. Nearly all the people of the other village had crossed the
river, and the chief of the Rees, whose name was Bald Eagle, went home
with his wife last of all. It was about dusk as they entered their
bullhide boat, and the two Sioux stood there looking at them.

“Suddenly Big Whip exclaimed: ‘Friend, let us kill the chief. I dare you
to kill and scalp him!’ His friend replied:

“‘It shall be as you say. I will stand by you in all things. I am
willing to die with you.’

“Accordingly Bald Eagle pulled out his gun and shot the Ree dead. From
that day he took his name. The old man fell backward into his boat, and
the old woman screamed and wept as she rowed him across the river. The
other young man shot an arrow or two at the wife, but she continued to
row until she reached the other bank.

“There was great excitement on both sides of the river as soon as
the people saw what had happened. There were two camps of Sioux, the
Blackfoot Sioux and the Yanktonnais, or our people. Of course the
Mandans and Rees greatly outnumbered us; their camp must have numbered
two or three thousand, which was more than we had in our combined camps.

“There was a Sioux whose name was Black Shield, who had intermarried
among the Rees. He came down to the opposite bank of the Missouri and
shouted to us:

“‘Of which one of your bands is the man who killed Bald Eagle?’

“One of the Blackfoot Sioux replied:

“‘It is a man of the Yanktonnais Sioux who killed Bald Eagle.’

“Then he said: ‘The Rees wish to do battle with them; you had better
withdraw from their camp.’

“Accordingly the Blackfeet retired about a mile from us upon the bluffs
and pitched their tents, while the Yanktonnais remained on the flats.
The two bands had been great rivals in courage and the art of war, so
we did not ask for help from our kinsfolk, but during the night we dug
trenches about the camp, the inner one for the women and children, and
the outer one for the men to stay in and do battle.

“The next morning at daybreak the enemy landed and approached our camp
in great numbers. Some of their women and old men came also, and sat
upon the bluffs to watch the fight and to carry off their dead and
wounded. The Blackfeet likewise were watching the battle from the
bluffs, and just before the fight began one Blackfoot came in with his
wife and joined us. His name was Red Dog’s Track, but from that day he
was called He-Came-Back. His wife was a Yanktonnais, and he had said to
her: ‘If I don’t join your tribe to-day, my brothers-in-law will call me
a coward.’

“The Sioux were well entrenched and well armed with guns and arrows,
and their aim was deadly, so that the Rees crawled up gradually and took
every opportunity to pick off any Sioux who ventured to show his head
above the trenches. In like manner every Ree who exposed himself was
sure to die.

“Up to this time no one had seen the two men who made all the trouble.
There was a natural hollow in the bank, concealed by buffalo berry
bushes, very near where they stood when Bald Eagle shot the Ree.

“‘Friend,’ said Big Whip, ‘it is likely that our own people will punish
us for this deed. They will pursue and kill us wherever they find us.
They have the right to do this. The best thing is to drop into this
washout and remain there until they cease to look for us.’

“They did so, and remained hidden during the night. But, after the fight
began, Big Whip said again: ‘Friend, we are the cause of the deaths of
many brave men this day. We committed the act to show our bravery. We
dared each other to do it. It will now become us as warriors to join our
band.’

“They both stripped, and taking their weapons in hand, ran toward the
camp. They had to pass directly through the enemy’s lines, but they were
not recognized till they had fairly passed them. Then they were between
two fires. When they had almost reached the entrenchment they faced
about and fired at the Rees, jumping about incessantly to avoid being
hit, as is the Indian fashion. Bullets and arrows were flying all about
them like hail, but at last they dropped back unhurt into the Sioux
trenches. Thus the two men saved their reputation for bravery, and their
people never openly reproached them for the events of that day. Young
men are often rash, but it is not well to reprove one for a brave deed
lest he become a coward.

“Many were killed, but more of the Rees than of our band. About the
middle of the afternoon there came a cold rain. It was in the fall of
the year. The bow-strings were wet, and the guns were only flint-locks.
You know when the flint becomes wet it is useless, and it looked as if
the fight must be with knives.

“But the Rees were much disheartened. They had lost many. The women
were all the time carrying off the wounded, and there were the Blackfoot
Sioux watching them from the hills. They turned and fled toward the
river. The Sioux followed like crazy wolves, tomahawking the tired and
slow ones. Many were killed at the boats, and some of the boats were
punctured with shot and sank. Some carried a load of Sioux arrows back
across the river. That was the greatest battle ever fought by our band,”
 the old man concluded, with a deep sigh of mingled satisfaction and
regret.


III. THE SINGING SPIRIT


I

“Ho my steed, we must climb one more hill! My reputation depends upon my
report!”

Anookasan addressed his pony as if he were a human companion, urged on
like himself by human need and human ambition. And yet in his heart he
had very little hope of sighting any buffalo in that region at just that
time of the year.

The Yankton Sioux were ordinarily the most far-sighted of their people
in selecting a winter camp, but this year the late fall had caught them
rather far east of the Missouri bottoms, their favorite camping-ground.
The upper Jim River, called by the Sioux the River of Gray Woods, was
usually bare of large game at that season. Their store of jerked buffalo
meat did not hold out as they had hoped, and by March it became an
urgent necessity to send out scouts for buffalo.

The old men at the tiyo teepee (council lodge) held a long council. It
was decided to select ten of their bravest and hardiest young men to
explore the country within three days’ journey of their camp.

“Anookasan, uyeyo-o-o, woo, woo!” Thus the ten men were summoned to
the council lodge early in the evening to receive their commission.
Anookasan was the first called and first to cross the circle of the
teepees. A young man of some thirty years, of the original native
type, his massive form was wrapped in a fine buffalo robe with the hair
inside. He wore a stately eagle feather in his scalp-lock, but no paint
about his face.

As he entered the lodge all the inmates greeted him with marked respect,
and he was given the place of honor. When all were seated the great
drum was struck and a song sung by four deep-chested men. This was the
prelude to a peculiar ceremony.

A large red pipe, which had been filled and laid carefully upon the
central hearth, was now taken up by an old man, whose face was painted
red. First he held it to the ground with the words: “Great Mother,
partake of this!” Then he held it toward the sky, saying: “Great Father,
smoke this!” Finally he lighted it, took four puffs, pointing it to the
four corners of the earth in turn, and lastly presented it to Anookasan.
This was the oath of office, administered by the chief of the council
lodge. The other nine were similarly commissioned, and all accepted the
appointment.

It was no light task that was thus religiously enjoined upon these
ten men. It meant at the least several days and nights of wandering
in search of signs of the wily buffalo. It was a public duty, and a
personal one as well; one that must involve untold hardship; and if
overtaken by storm the messengers were in peril of death!

Anookasan returned to his teepee with some misgiving. His old charger,
which had so often carried him to victory, was not so strong as he had
been in his prime. As his master approached the lodge the old horse
welcomed him with a gentle whinny. He was always tethered near by, ready
for any emergency.

“Ah, Wakan! we are once more called upon to do duty! We shall set out
before daybreak.”

As he spoke, he pushed nearer a few strips of the poplar bark, which was
oats to the Indian pony of the olden time.

Anookasan had his extra pair of buffaloskin moccasins with the hair
inside, and his scanty provision of dried meat neatly done up in a
small packet and fastened to his saddle. With his companions he started
northward, up the River of the Gray Woods, five on the east side and a
like number on the west.

The party had separated each morning, so as to cover as much ground as
possible, having agreed to return at night to the river. It was now the
third day; their food was all but gone, their steeds much worn, and the
signs seemed to indicate a storm. Yet the hunger of their friends and
their own pride impelled them to persist, for out of many young men
they had been chosen, therefore they must prove themselves equal to the
occasion.

The sun, now well toward the western horizon, cast over snow-covered
plains a purplish light. No living creature was in sight and the quest
seemed hopeless, but Anookasan was not one to accept defeat.

“There may be an outlook from yonder hill which will turn failure into
success,” he thought, as he dug his heels into the sides of his faithful
nag. At the same time he started a “Strong Heart” song to keep his
courage up!

At the summit of the ascent he paused and gazed steadily before him. At
the foot of the next coteau he beheld a strip of black. He strained his
eyes to look, for the sun had already set behind the hilltops. It was
a great herd of buffaloes, he thought, which was grazing on the
foot-hills.

“Hi hi, uncheedah! Hi, hi, tunkasheedah!” he was about to exclaim in
gratitude, when, looking more closely, he discovered his mistake. The
dark patch was only timber.

His horse could not carry him any further, so he got off and ran behind
him toward the river. At dusk he hailed his companions.

“Ho, what success?” one cried.

“Not a sign of even a lone bull,” replied another.

“Yet I saw a gray wolf going north this evening. His direction is
propitious,” remarked Anookasan, as he led the others down the slope and
into the heavy timber. The river just here made a sharp turn, forming a
densely wooded semicircle, in the shelter of a high bluff.

The braves were all downhearted because of their ill-luck, and only the
sanguine spirit of Anookasan kept them from utter discouragement. Their
slight repast had been taken and each man had provided himself with
abundance of dry grass and twigs for a bed. They had built a temporary
wigwam of the same material, in the center of which there was a generous
fire. Each man stretched himself out upon his robe in the glow of it.
Anookasan filled the red pipe, and, having lighted it, he took one or
two hasty puffs and held it up to the moon, which was scarcely visible
behind the cold clouds.

“Great Mother, partake of this smoke! May I eat meat to-morrow!” he
exclaimed with solemnity. Having uttered this prayer, he handed the pipe
to the man nearest him.

For a time they all smoked in silence; then came a distant call.

“Ah, it is Shunkmanito, the wolf! There is something cheering in his
voice to-night,” declared Anookasan. “Yes, I am sure he is telling us
not to be discouraged. You know that the wolf is one of our best friends
in trouble. Many a one has been guided back to his home by him in a
blizzard, or led to game when in desperate need. My friends, let us not
turn back in the morning; let us go north one more day!”

No one answered immediately, and again silence reigned, while one by one
they pulled the reluctant whiffs of smoke through the long stem of the
calumet.

“What is that?” said one of the men, and all listened intently to catch
the delicate sound. They were familiar with all the noises of the night
and voices of the forest, but this was not like any of them.

“It sounds like the song of a mosquito, and one might forget while he
listens that this is not midsummer,” said one.

“I hear also the medicine-man’s single drumbeat,” suggested another.

“There is a tradition,” remarked Anookasan, that many years ago a party
of hunters went up the river on a scout like this of ours. They never
returned. Afterward, in the summer, their bones were found near the home
of a strange creature, said to be a little man, but he had hair all over
him. The Isantees call him Chanotedah. Our old men give him the name
Oglugechana. This singular being is said to be no larger than a new-born
babe. He speaks an unknown tongue.

“The home of Oglugechana is usually a hollow stump, around which all of
the nearest trees are felled by lightning. There is an open spot in the
deep woods wherever he dwells. His weapons are the plumes of various
birds. Great numbers of these variegated feathers are to be found in the
deserted lodge of the little man.

“It is told by the old men that Oglugechana has a weird music by which
he sometimes bewitches lone travelers. He leads them hither and thither
about his place until they have lost their senses. Then he speaks to
them. He may make of them great war-prophets or medicinemen, but his
commands are hard to fulfill. If any one sees him and comes away before
he is bewildered, the man dies as soon as he smells the camp-fire, or
when he enters his home his nearest relative dies suddenly.”

The warrior who related this legend assumed the air of one who narrates
authentic history, and his listeners appeared to be seriously impressed.
What we call the supernatural was as real to them as any part of their
lives.

“This thing does not stop to breathe at all. His music seems to go on
endlessly,” said one, with considerable uneasiness.

“It comes from the heavy timber north of us, under the high cliff,”
 reported a warrior who had stepped outside of the rude temporary
structure to inform himself more clearly of the direction of the sound.

“Anookasan, you are our leader--tell us what we should do! We will
follow you. I believe we ought to leave this spot immediately. This is
perhaps the spirit of some dead enemy,” suggested another. Meanwhile,
the red pipe was refilled and sent around the circle to calm their
disturbed spirits.

When the calumet returned at last to the one addressed, he took it in a
preoccupied manner, and spoke between labored pulls on the stem.

“I am just like yourselves--nothing more than flesh--with a spirit that
is as ready to leave me as water to run from a punctured water-bag! When
we think thus, we are weak. Let us rather think upon the brave deeds
of our ancestors! This singing spirit has a gentle voice; I am ready to
follow and learn if it be an enemy or no. Let us all be found together
next summer if need be!”

“Ho, ho, ho!” was the full-throated response.

“All put on your war-paint,” suggested Anookasan. “Have your knives and
arrows ready!”

They did so, and all stole silently through the black forest in the
direction of the mysterious sound. Clearer and clearer it came through
the frosty air; but it was a foreign sound to the savage ear. Now it
seemed to them almost like a distant water-fall; then it recalled the
low hum of summer insects and the drowsy drone of the bumblebee. Thump,
thump, thump! was the regular accompaniment.

Nearer and nearer to the cliff they came, deeper into the wild heart
of the woods. At last out of the gray, formless night a dark shape
appeared! It looked to them like a huge buffalo bull standing motionless
in the forest, and from his throat there apparently proceeded the thump
of the medicine drum, and the song of the beguiling spirit!

All of a sudden a spark went up into the air. As they continued to
approach, there became visible a deep glow about the middle of the dark
object. Whatever it was, they had never heard of anything like it in all
their lives!

Anookasan was a little in advance of his companions, and it was he who
finally discovered a wall of logs laid one upon another. Half way up
there seemed to be stretched a par-fleche (raw-hide), from which a dim
light emanated. He still thought of Oglugechana, who dwells within a
hollow tree, and determined to surprise and if possible to overpower
this wonderworking old man.

All now took their knives in their hands and advanced with their leader
to the attack upon the log hut. “Wa-wa-wa-wa, woo, woo!” they cried.
Zip, zip! went the par-fleche door and window, and they all rushed in!

There sat a man upon a roughly hewn stool. He was attired in wolfskins
and wore a foxskin cap upon his head. The larger portion of his face was
clothed with natural fur. A rudely made cedar fiddle was tucked
under his furred chin. Supporting it with his left hand, he sawed it
vigorously with a bow that was not unlike an Indian boy’s miniature
weapon, while his moccasined left foot came down upon the sod floor in
time with the music. When the shrill war-whoop came, and the door and
window were cut in strips by the knives of the Indians, he did not even
cease playing, but instinctively he closed his eyes, so as not to behold
the horror of his own end.


II

It was long ago, upon the rolling prairie south of the Devil’s Lake,
that a motley body of hunters gathered near a mighty herd of the bison,
in the Moon of Falling Leaves. These were the first generation of the
Canadian mixed-bloods, who sprang up in such numbers as to form almost
a new people. These semi-wild Americans soon became a necessity to the
Hudson Bay Company, as they were the greatest hunters of the bison,
and made more use of this wonderful animal than even their aboriginal
ancestors.

A curious race of people this, in their make-up and their customs! Their
shaggy black hair was allowed to grow long, reaching to their broad
shoulders, then cut off abruptly, making their heads look like a
thatched house. Their dark faces were in most cases well covered with
hair, their teeth large and white, and their eyes usually liquid black,
although occasionally one had a tiger-brown or cold-gray eye. Their
costume was a buckskin shirt with abundance of fringes, buckskin
pantaloons with short leggins, a gay sash, and a cap of fox-fur. Their
arms consisted of flint-lock guns, hatchets, and butcher-knives. Their
ponies were small, but as hardy as themselves.

As these men gathered in the neighborhood of an immense herd of
buffaloes, they busied themselves in adjusting the girths of their
beautifully beaded pillow-like saddles. Among them there were
exceptional riders and hunters. It was said that few could equal Antoine
Michaud in feats of riding into and through the herd. There he stood,
all alone, the observed of many others. It was his habit to give several
Indian yells when the onset began, so as to insure a successful hunt.

In this instance, Antoine gave his usual whoops, and when they had
almost reached the herd, he lifted his flint-lock over his head and
plunged into the black moving mass. With a sound like the distant
rumbling of thunder, those tens of thousands of buffalo hoofs were
pounding the earth in retreat. Thus Antoine disappeared!

His wild steed dashed into the midst of the vast herd. Fortunately for
him, the animals kept clear of him; but alas! the gap through which he
had entered instantly closed again.

He yelled frantically to secure an outlet, but without effect. He had
tied a red bandanna around his head to keep the hair off his face,
and he now took this off and swung it crazily about him to scatter the
buffalo, but it availed him nothing.

With such a mighty herd in flight, the speed could not be great;
therefore the “Bois Brule” settled himself to the situation, allowing
his pony to canter along slowly to save his strength. It required much
tact and presence of mind to keep an open space, for the few paces of
obstruction behind had gradually grown into a mile.

The mighty host moved continually southward, walking and running
alternately. As the sun neared the western horizon, it fired the sky
above them, and all the distant hills and prairies were in the glow of
it, but immediately about them was a thick cloud of dust, and the ground
appeared like a fire-swept plain.

Suddenly Antoine was aware of a tremendous push from behind. The animals
smelled the cool water of a spring which formed a large bog in the midst
of the plain. This solitary pond or marsh was a watering-place for the
wild animals. All pushed and edged toward it; it was impossible for any
one to withstand the combined strength of so many.

Antoine and his steed were in imminent danger of being pushed into
the mire and trampled upon, but a mere chance brought them upon solid
ground. As they were crowded across the marsh, his pony drank heartily,
and he, for the first time, let go his bridle, put his two palms
together for a dipper, and drank greedily of the bitter water. He had
not eaten since early morning, so he now pulled up some bulrushes and
ate of the tender bulbs, while the pony grazed as best he could on the
tops of the tall grass.

It was now dark. The night was wellnigh intolerable for Antoine. The
buffalo were about him in countless numbers, regarding him with vicious
glances. It was only by reason of the natural offensiveness of man that
they gave him any space. The bellowing of the bulls became general, and
there was a marked uneasiness on the part of the herd. This was a
sign of approaching storm, therefore the unfortunate hunter had this
additional cause for anxiety. Upon the western horizon were seen some
flashes of lightning.

The cloud which had been a mere speck upon the horizon had now increased
to large proportions. Suddenly the wind came, and lightning flashes
became more frequent, showing the ungainly forms of the animals like
strange monsters in the white light. The colossal herd was again in
violent motion. It was a blind rush for shelter, and no heed was paid
to buffalo wallows or even deep gulches. All was in the deepest of
darkness. There seemed to be groaning in heaven and earth--millions of
hoofs and throats roaring in unison!

As a shipwrecked man clings to a mere fragment of wood, so Antoine,
although almost exhausted with fatigue, still stuck to the back of his
equally plucky pony. Death was imminent for them both. As the mad rush
continued, every flash displayed heaps of bison in death struggle under
the hoofs of their companions.

From time to time Antoine crossed himself and whispered a prayer to the
Virgin; and again he spoke to his horse after the fashion of an Indian:

“Be brave, be strong, my horse! If we survive this trial, you shall have
great honor!”

The stampede continued until they reached the bottom lands, and, like
a rushing stream, their course was turned aside by the steep bank of
a creek or small river. Then they moved more slowly in wide sweeps or
circles, until the storm ceased, and the exhausted hunter, still in his
saddle, took some snatches of sleep.

When he awoke and looked about him again it was morning. The herd had
entered the strip of timber which lay on both sides of the river, and
it was here that Antoine conceived his first distinct hope of saving
himself.

“Waw, waw, waw!” was the hoarse cry that came to his ears, apparently
from a human being in distress. Antoine strained his eyes and craned his
neck to see who it could be. Through an opening in the branches ahead he
perceived a large grizzly bear, lying along an inclined limb and hugging
it desperately to maintain his position. The herd had now thoroughly
pervaded the timber, and the bear was likewise hemmed in. He had taken
to his unaccustomed refuge after making a brave stand against several
bulls, one of which lay dead near by, while he himself was bleeding from
many wounds.

Antoine had been assiduously looking for a friendly tree, by means of
which he hoped to effect his escape from captivity by the army of bison.
His horse, by chance, made his way directly under the very box-elder
that was sustaining the bear and there was a convenient branch just
within his reach. The Bois Brule was not then in an aggressive mood,
and he saw at a glance that the occupant of the tree would not interfere
with him. They were, in fact, companions in distress. Antoine tried
to give a war-whoop as he sprang desperately from the pony’s back and
seized the cross limb with both his hands.

The hunter dangled in the air for a minute that to him seemed a year.
Then he gathered up all the strength that was in him, and with one grand
effort he pulled himself up on the limb.

If he had failed in this, he would have fallen to the ground under the
hoofs of the buffaloes, and at their mercy.

After he had adjusted his seat as comfortably as he could, Antoine
surveyed the situation. He had at least escaped from sudden and certain
death. It grieved him that he had been forced to abandon his horse, and
he had no idea how far he had come nor any means of returning to his
friends, who had, no doubt, given him up for lost. His immediate needs
were rest and food.

Accordingly he selected a fat cow and emptied into her sides one barrel
of his gun, which had been slung across his chest. He went on shooting
until he had killed many fat cows, greatly to the discomfiture of his
neighbor, the bear, while the bison vainly struggled among themselves to
keep the fatal spot clear.

By the middle of the afternoon the main body of the herd had passed, and
Antoine was sure that his captivity had at last come to an end. Then
he swung himself from his limb to the ground, and walked stiffly to
the carcass of the nearest cow, which he dressed and prepared himself a
meal. But first he took a piece of liver on a long pole to the bear!

Antoine finally decided to settle in the recesses of the heavy timber
for the winter, as he was on foot and alone, and not able to travel any
great distance. He jerked the meat of all the animals he had killed, and
prepared their skins for bedding and clothing. The Bois Brule and Ami,
as he called the bear, soon became necessary to one another. The former
considered the bear very good company, and the latter had learned that
man’s business, after all, is not to kill every animal he meets. He had
been fed and kindly treated, when helpless from his wounds, and this he
could not forget.

Antoine was soon busy erecting a small log hut, while the other partner
kept a sharp lookout, and, after his hurts were healed, often brought in
some small game. The two had a perfect understanding without many words;
at least, the speech was all upon one side! In his leisure moments
Antoine had occupied himself with whittling out a rude fiddle of
cedar-wood, strung with the guts of a wild cat that he had killed. Every
evening that winter he would sit down after supper and play all the old
familiar pieces, varied with improvisations of his own. At first, the
music and the incessant pounding time with his foot annoyed the bear. At
times, too, the Canadian would call out the figures for the dance. All
this Ami became accustomed to in time, and even showed no small interest
in the buzzing of the little cedar box. Not infrequently, he was out
in the evening, and the human partner was left alone. It chanced, quite
fortunately, that the bear was absent on the night that the red folk
rudely invaded the lonely hut.

The calmness of the strange being had stayed their hands. They had never
before seen a man of other race than their own!

“Is this Chanotedah? Is he man, or beast?” the warriors asked one
another.

“Ho, wake up, koda!” exclaimed Anookasan. “Maybe he is of the porcupine
tribe, ashamed to look at us!”

At this moment they spied the haunch of venison which swung from a
cross-stick over a fine bed of coals, in front of the rude mud chimney.

“Ho, koda has something to eat! Sit down, sit down!” they shouted to one
another.

Now Antoine opened his eyes for the first time upon his unlooked-for
guests. They were a haggard and hungry-looking set. Anookasan extended
his hand, and Antoine gave it a hearty shake. He set his fiddle against
the wall and began to cut up the smoking venison into generous pieces
and place it before them. All ate like famished men, while the firelight
intensified the red paint upon their wild and warlike faces.

When he had satisfied his first hunger, Anookasan spoke in signs.
“Friend, we have never before heard a song like that of your little
cedar box! We had supposed it to be a spirit, or some harmful thing,
hence our attack upon it. We never saw any people of your sort. What is
your tribe?”

Antoine explained his plight in the same manner, and the two soon came
to an understanding. The Canadian told the starving hunters of a buffalo
herd a little way to the north, and one of their number was dispatched
homeward with the news. In two days the entire band reached Antoine’s
place. The Bois Brule was treated with kindness and honor, and the tribe
gave him a wife. Suffice it to say that Antoine lived and died among the
Yanktons at a good old age; but Ami could not brook the invasion upon
their hermit life. He was never seen after that first evening.


IV. THE FAMINE

On the Assiniboine River in western Manitoba there stands an old,
historic trading-post, whose crumbling walls crown a high promontory in
the angle formed by its junction with a tributary stream. This is Fort
Ellis, a mistress of the wilderness and lodestone of savage tribes
between the years 1830 and 1870.

Hither at that early day the Indians brought their buffalo robes and
beaver skins to exchange for merchandise, ammunition, and the “spirit
water.” Among the others there presently appeared a band of renegade
Sioux--the exiles, as they called themselves--under White Lodge, whose
father, Little Crow, had been a leader in the outbreak of 1862. Now the
great warchief was dead, and his people were prisoners or fugitives.
The shrewd Scotch trader, McLeod, soon discovered that the Sioux were
skilled hunters, and therefore he exerted himself to befriend them,
as well as to encourage a feeling of good will between them and the
Canadian tribes who were accustomed to make the old fort their summer
rendezvous.

Now the autumn had come, after a long summer of feasts and dances, and
the three tribes broke up and dispersed as usual in various directions.
White Lodge had twin daughters, very handsome, whose ears had been kept
burning with the proposals of many suitors, but none had received any
definite encouragement. There were one or two who would have been quite
willing to forsake their own tribes and follow the exiles had they
not feared too much the ridicule of the braves. Even Angus McLeod, the
trader’s eldest son, had need of all his patience and caution, for he
had never seen any woman he admired so much as the piquant Magaskawee,
called The Swan, one of these belles of the forest.

The Sioux journeyed northward, toward the Mouse River. They had wintered
on that stream before, and it was then the feeding ground of large herds
of buffalo. When it was discovered that the herds were moving westward,
across the Missouri, there was no little apprehension. The shrewd
medicine-man became aware of the situation, and hastened to announce his
prophecy:

“The Great Mystery has appeared to me in a dream! He showed me men with
haggard and thin faces. I interpret this to mean a scarcity of food
during the winter.”

The chief called his counselors together and set before them the dream
of the priest, whose prophecy, he said, was already being fulfilled in
part by the westward movement of the buffalo. It was agreed that they
should lay up all the dried meat they could obtain; but even for this
they were too late. The storms were already at hand, and that winter was
more severe than any that the old men could recall in their traditions.
The braves killed all the small game for a wide circuit around the camp,
but the buffalo had now crossed the river, and that country was not
favorable for deer. The more enterprising young men organized hunting
expeditions to various parts of the open prairie, but each time they
returned with empty hands.

The “Moon of Sore Eyes,” or March, had come at last, and Wazeah, the God
of Storm, was still angry. Their scant provision of dried meat had held
out wonderfully, but it was now all but consumed. The Sioux had but
little ammunition, and the snow was still so deep that it was impossible
for them to move away to any other region in search of game. The worst
was feared; indeed, some of the children and feeble old people had
already succumbed.

White Lodge again called his men together in council, and it was
determined to send a messenger to Fort Ellis to ask for relief. A young
man called Face-the-Wind was chosen for his exceptional qualities of
speed and endurance upon long journeys. The old medicine-man, whose
shrewd prophecy had gained for him the confidence of the people, now
came forward. He had closely observed the appearance of the messenger
selected, and had taken note of the storm and distance. Accordingly he
said:

“My children, the Great Mystery is offended, and this is the cause of
all our suffering! I see a shadow hanging over our messenger, but I will
pray to the Great Spirit--perhaps he may yet save him!--Great Mystery,
be thou merciful! Strengthen this young man for his journey, that he
may be able to finish it and to send us aid! If we see the sun of summer
again, we will offer the choicest of our meats to thee, and do thee
great honor!”

During this invocation, as occasionally happens in March, a loud peal
of thunder was heard. This coincidence threw the prophet almost into
a frenzy, and the poor people were all of a tremble. Face-the-Wind
believed that the prayer was directly answered, and though weakened by
fasting and unfit for the task before him, he was encouraged to make the
attempt.

He set out on the following day at dawn, and on the third day staggered
into the fort, looking like a specter and almost frightening the people.
He was taken to McLeod’s house and given good care. The poor fellow,
delirious with hunger, fancied himself engaged in mortal combat with
Eyah, the god of famine, who has a mouth extending from ear to ear.
Wherever he goes there is famine, for he swallows all that he sees, even
whole nations!

The legend has it that Eyah fears nothing but the jingling of metal: so
finally the dying man looked up into McLeod’s face and cried: “Ring your
bell in his face, Wahadah!”


The kind-hearted factor could not refuse, and as the great bell used to
mark the hours of work and of meals pealed out untimely upon the frosty
air, the Indian started up and in that moment breathed his last. He had
given no news, and McLeod and his sons could only guess at the state of
affairs upon the Mouse River.

While the men were in council with her father, Magaskawee had turned
over the contents of her work-bag. She had found a small roll of
birch-bark in which she kept her porcupine quills for embroidery, and
pulled the delicate layers apart. The White Swan was not altogether the
untutored Indian maiden, for she had lived in the family of a missionary
in the States, and had learned both to speak and write some English.
There was no ink, no pen or pencil, but with her bone awl she pressed
upon the white side of the bark the following words:

   MR. ANGUS McLEOD:--

   We are near the hollow rock on the Mouse River. The
   buffalo went away across the Missouri, and our powder and
   shot are gone. We are starving. Good-bye, if I don’t see
   you again.

   MAGASKAWEE.


The girl entrusted this little note to her grandmother, and she in turn
gave it to the messenger. But he, as we know, was unable to deliver it.

“Angus, tell the boys to bury the poor fellow to-morrow. I dare say
he brought us some news from White Lodge, but we have got to go to the
happy hunting-grounds to get it, or wait till the exile band returns in
the spring. Evidently,” continued McLeod, “he fell sick on the way: or
else he was starving!”

This last suggestion horrified Angus. “I believe, father,” he exclaimed,
“that we ought to examine his bundle.”

A small oblong packet was brought forth from the dead man’s belt and
carefully unrolled.

There were several pairs of moccasins, and within one of these Angus
found something wrapped up nicely. He proceeded to unwind the long
strings of deerskin with which it was securely tied, and brought forth a
thin sheet of birch-bark. At first, there seemed to be nothing more,
but a closer scrutiny revealed the impression of the awl, and the bit
of nature’s parchment was brought nearer to his face, and scanned with a
zeal equal to that of any student of ancient hieroglyphics.

“This tells the whole story, father!” exclaimed the young man at last.
“Magaskawee’s note--just listen!” and he read it aloud. “I shall start
to-morrow. We can take enough provision and ammunition on two sleds,
with six dogs to each. I shall want three good men to go with me.” Angus
spoke with decision.

“Well, we can’t afford to lose our best hunters; and you might also
bring home with you what furs and robes they have on hand,” was his
father’s prudent reply.

“I don’t care particularly for the skins,” Angus declared; but he at
once began hurried preparations for departure.

In the meantime affairs grew daily more desperate in the exile village
on the far-away Mouse River, and a sort of Indian hopelessness and
resignation settled down upon the little community. There were few who
really expected their messenger to reach the fort, or believed that even
if he did so, relief would be sent in time to save them. White Lodge,
the father of his people, was determined to share with them the last
mouthful of food, and every morning Winona and Magaskawee went with
scanty portions in their hands to those whose supply had entirely
failed.

On the outskirts of the camp there dwelt an old woman with an orphan
grandchild, who had been denying herself for some time in order that the
child might live longer. This poor teepee the girls visited often, and
one on each side they raised the exhausted woman and poured into her
mouth the warm broth they had brought with them.

It was on the very day Face-the-Wind reached Fort Ellis that a young
hunter who had ventured further from the camp than any one else had
the luck to bring down a solitary deer with his bow and arrow. In his
weakness he had reached camp very late, bearing the deer with the utmost
difficulty upon his shoulders. It was instantly separated into as many
pieces as there were lodges of the famishing Sioux. These delicious
morsels were hastily cooked and eagerly devoured, but among so many
there was scarcely more than a mouthful to the share of each, and the
brave youth himself did not receive enough to appease in the least his
craving!

On the eve of Angus’ departure for the exile village, Three Stars, a
devoted suitor of Winona’s, accompanied by another Assiniboine brave,
appeared unexpectedly at the fort. He at once asked permission to join
the relief party, and they set out at daybreak.

The lead-dog was the old reliable Mack, who had been in service for
several seasons on winter trips. All of the white men were clad in
buckskin shirts and pantaloons, with long fringes down the sides, fur
caps and fur-lined moccasins. Their guns were fastened to the long,
toboggan-like sleds.

The snow had thawed a little and formed an icy crust, and over this
fresh snow had fallen, which a northwest wind swept over the surface
like ashes after a prairie fire. The sun appeared for a little time in
the morning, but it seemed as if he were cutting short his course on
account of the bleak day, and had protected himself with pale rings of
fire.

The dogs laid back their ears, drew in their tails, and struck into
their customary trot, but even old Mack looked back frequently, as if
reluctant to face such a pricking and scarifying wind. The men felt the
cold still more keenly, although they had taken care to cover every bit
of the face except one eye, and that was completely blinded at times by
the granulated snow.

The sun early retreated behind a wall of cloud, and the wind moaned and
wailed like a living creature in anguish. At last they approached the
creek where they had planned to camp for the night. There was nothing
to be seen but a few stunted willows half buried in the drifts, but the
banks of the little stream afforded some protection from the wind.

“Whoa!” shouted the leader, and the dogs all stopped, sitting down on
their haunches. “Come, Mack!” (with a wave of the hand), “lead your
fellows down to the creek!”

The old dog started down at the word, and all the rest followed. A
space was quickly cleared of snow, while one man scoured the thickets
in search of brush for fuel. In a few minutes the tent was up and a fire
kindled in the center, while the floor was thickly strewn with twigs of
willow, over which buffalo robes were spread. Three Stars attended to
supper, and soon in the midst of the snapping willow fire a kettle was
boiling. All partook of strong tea, dried meat of buffalo, and pemmican,
a mixture of pounded dried meat with wild cherries and melted fat. The
dogs, to whom one-half the tent was assigned, enjoyed a hearty meal and
fell into a deep sleep, lying one against another.

After supper Jerry drove two sticks into the ground, one on each side of
the fire, and connected the two by a third one over the blaze. Upon
this all hung their socks to dry--most of them merely square pieces of
blanket cut to serve that purpose. Soon each man rolled himself in his
own buffalo robe and fell asleep.

All night the wind raged. The lonely teepee now and then shuddered
violently, as a stronger blast than usual almost lifted it from the
ground. No one stirred except from time to time one of the dogs, who
got up snarling and sniffing the cold air, turned himself round several
times as if on a pivot, and finally lay down for another nap.

In the morning the travelers one by one raised their heads and looked
through the smoke-hole, then fell back again with a grunt. All the world
appeared without form and void. Presently, however, the light of the sun
was seen as if through a painted window, and by afternoon they were able
to go on, the wind having partially subsided. This was only a taste of
the weather encountered by the party on their unseasonable trip; but had
it been ten times harder, it would never have occurred to Angus to turn
back.

On the third day the rescuers approached the camp of the exiles. There
was an ominous quiet; no creature was to be seen; but the smoke which
ascended into the air in perpendicular columns assured them that some,
at least, were still alive. The party happened to reach first the teepee
of the poor old woman who had been so faithfully ministered to by the
twin sisters. They had no longer any food to give, but they had come to
build her fire, if she should have survived the night. At the very door
of the lodge they heard the jingle of dog-bells, but they had not time
to announce the joyful news before the men were in sight.

In another minute Angus and Three Stars were beside them, holding their
wasted hands.


V. THE CHIEF SOLDIER

Just outside of a fine large wigwam of smoke-tanned buffalo-skins stood
Tawasuota, very early upon an August morning of the year 1862. Behind
the wigwam there might have been seen a thrifty patch of growing
maize, whose tall, graceful stalks resembled as many warriors in
dancing-dresses and tasseled head-gear.

“Thanks be to the ‘Great Mystery,’ I have been successful in the
fortunes of war! None can say that Tawasuota is a coward. I have done
well; so well that our chief, Little Crow, has offered me the honored
position of his chief soldier, ta akich-itah!” he said to himself with
satisfaction.

The sun was just over the eastem bank of the Minnesota River, and he
could distinctly see upon the level prairie the dwellings of logs which
had sprung up there during the year, since Little Crow’s last treaty
with the whites. “Ugh! they are taking from us our beautiful and
game-teeming country!” was his thought as he gazed upon them.

At that moment, out of the conical white teepee, in shape like a
new-born mushroom, there burst two little frisky boys, leaping and
whooping. They were clad gracefully in garments of fine deerskin, and
each wore a miniature feather upon his head, marking them as children of
a distinguished warrior.

They danced nimbly around their father, while he stood with all the
dignity of a buck elk, viewing the landscape reddened by sunrise and the
dwellers therein, the old and the new, the red and the white. He noticed
that they were still unmingled; the river divided them.

At last he took the dancing little embryo warriors one in either hand,
and lifted them to his majestic shoulders. There he placed them
in perfect poise. His haughty spirit found a moment’s happiness in
fatherhood.

Suddenly Tawasuota set the two boys on the ground again, and signed
to them to enter the teepee. Apparently all was quiet. The camps and
villages of the Minnesota reservation were undisturbed, so far as he
could see, save by the awakening of nature; and the early risers among
his people moved about in seeming security, while the smoke of their
morning fires arose one by one into the blue. Still the warrior gazed
steadily westward, up the river, whence his quick ear had caught the
faint but ominous sound of a distant war-whoop.

The ridge beyond the Wahpeton village bounded the view, and between this
point and his own village were the agency buildings and the traders’
stores. The Indian’s keen eye swept the horizon, and finally alighted
once more upon the home of his new neighbor across the river, the
flaxen-haired white man with many children, who with his white squaw
and his little ones worked from sunrise to sunset, much like the beaver
family.

Ah! the distant war-whoop once more saluted his ear, but this time
nearer and more distinct.

“What! the Rice Creek band is coming in full war-paint! Can it be
another Ojibway attack? Ugh, ugh! I will show their warriors again this
day what it is to fight!” he exclaimed aloud.

The white traders and Government employees, those of them who were up
and about, heard and saw the advancing column of warriors. Yet they
showed no sign of anxiety or fear. Most of them thought that there might
be some report of Ojibways coming to attack the Sioux,--a not uncommon
incident,--and that those warriors were on their way to the post to
replenish their powder-horns. A few of the younger men were delighted
with the prospect of witnessing an Indian fight.

On swept the armed band, in numbers increasing at every village.

It was true that there had been a growing feeling of distrust among the
Indians, because their annuities had been withheld for a long time, and
the money payments had been delayed again and again. There were many in
great need. The traders had given them credit to some extent (charging
them four times the value of the article purchased), and had likewise
induced Little Crow to sign over to them ninety-eight thousand dollars,
the purchase-price of that part of their reservation lying north of the
Minnesota, and already occupied by the whites.

This act had made the chief very unpopular, and he was ready for a
desperate venture to regain his influence. Certain warriors among the
upper bands of Sioux had even threatened his life, but no one spoke
openly of a break with the whites.

When, therefore, the news came to Little Crow that some roving hunters
of the Rice Creek band had killed in a brawl two families of white
settlers, he saw his opportunity to show once for all to the disaffected
that he had no love for the white man. Immediately he sprang upon his
white horse, and prepared to make their cause a general one among his
people.

Tawasuota had scarcely finished his hasty preparations for war, by
painting his face and seeing to the loading of his gun, when he heard
the voice of Little Crow outside his lodge.

“You are now my head soldier,” said the chief, “and this is your first
duty. Little Six and his band have inaugurated the war against the
whites. They have already wiped out two families, and are now on their
way to the agency. Let my chief soldier fire the first shot.

“Those Indians who have cut their hair and donned the white man’s
clothing may give the warning; so make haste! If you fall to-day, there
is no better day on which to die, and the women of our tribe will weep
proud tears for Tawasuota. I leave it with you to lead my warriors.”
 With these words the wily chief galloped away to meet the war-party.

“Here comes Little Crow, the friend of the white man!” exclaimed a
warrior, as he approached.

“Friends and warriors, you will learn to-day who are the friends of
the white man, and none will dare again to insinuate that I have been
against the interests of my own people,” he replied.

After a brief consultation with the chiefs he advised the traders:

“Do not hesitate to fill the powder-horns of my warriors; they may be
compelled to fight all day.”

Soon loud yells were heard along the road to the Indian village.

“Ho, ho! Tawasuota u ye do!” (“He is coming; he is coming!”) shouted the
warriors in chorus.

The famous war-chief dismounted in silence, gun in hand, and walked
directly toward the larger store.

“Friend,” he exclaimed, “we may both meet the ‘Great Mystery’ to-day,
but you must go first.”

There was a loud report, and the unsuspecting white man lay dead. It was
James Lynd, one of the early traders, and a good friend to the Indians.

No sooner had Tawasuota fired the fatal shot than every other Indian
discharged his piece. Hither and thither ran the frantic people, seeking
safety, but seeking it in vain. They were wholly unprepared and at the
mercy of the foe.

The friendly Indians, too, were taken entirely by surprise. They had
often heard wild talk of revolt, but it had never had the indorsement of
intelligent chiefs, or of such a number as to carry any weight to their
minds. Christian Indians rushed in every direction to save, if possible,
at least the wives and children of the Government employees. Meanwhile,
the new white settlements along the Minnesota River were utterly
unconscious of any danger. Not a soul dreamed of the terrible calamity
that each passing moment was bringing nearer and nearer.

Tawasuota stepped aside, and took up his pipe. He seemed almost
oblivious of what he had done. While the massacre still raged about
him in all its awful cruelty, he sat smoking and trying to think
collectedly, but his mind was confused, and in his secret thoughts he
rebelled against Little Crow. It was a cowardly deed that he had been
ordered to commit, he thought; for he had won his reputation solely by
brave deeds in battle, and this was more like murdering one of his own
tribesmen--this killing of an unarmed white man. Up to this time the
killing of a white man was not counted the deed of a warrior; it was
murder.

The lesser braves might now satisfy their spite against the traders to
their hearts’ content, but Tawasuota had been upon the best of terms
with all of them.

Suddenly a ringing shout was heard. The chief soldier looked up, and
beheld a white man, nearly nude, leap from the roof of the larger store
and alight upon the ground hard by him.

He had emptied one barrel of his gun, and, if he chose to do so, could
have killed Myrick then and there; but he made no move, exclaiming:

“Ho, ho! Nina iyaye!” (“Run, run!”)

Away sped the white man in the direction of the woods and the river.

“Ah, he is swift; he will save himself,” thought Tawasuota.

All the Indians had now spied the fugitive; they yelled and fired at him
again and again, as if they were shooting at a running deer; but he
only ran faster. Just as he had reached the very edge of the sheltering
timber a single shot rang out, and he fell headlong.

A loud war-whoop went up, for many believed that this was one of the men
who had stolen their trust funds.

Tawasuota continued to sit and smoke in the shade while the carnage and
plunder that he had set on foot proceeded on all sides of him. Presently
men began to form small parties to cross the river on their mission of
death, but he refused to join any of them. At last, several of the older
warriors came up to smoke with him.

“Ho, nephew,” said one of them with much gravity, “you have precipitated
a dreadful calamity. This means the loss of our country, the destruction
of our nation. What were you thinking of?”

It was the Wahpeton chief who spoke, a blood-relation to Tawasuota. He
did not at once reply, but filled his pipe in silence, and handed it
to the man who thus reproached him. It was a just rebuke; for he was a
brave man, and he could have refused the request of his chief to open
the massacre.

At this moment it was announced that a body of white soldiers were on
the march from Fort Ridgeley. A large body of warriors set out to meet
them.

“Nephew, you have spilled the first blood of the white man; go, join in
battle with the soldiers. They are armed; they can defend themselves,”
 remarked the old chief, and Tawasuota replied:

“Uncle, you speak truth; I have committed the act of a coward. It was
not of my own will I did it; nevertheless, I have raised my weapon, and
I will fight the whites as long as I live. If I am ever taken, they
will first have to kill me.” He arose, took up his gun, and joined the
war-party.

The dreadful day of massacre was almost ended. The terrified Sioux women
and children had fled up the river before the approaching troops. Long
shafts of light from the setting sun painted every hill; one side red as
with blood, the other dark as the shadow of death. A cloud of smoke
from burning homes hung over the beautiful river. Even the permanent
dwellings of the Indians were empty, and all the teepees which had
dotted with their white cones the west bank of the Minnesota had
disappeared. Here and there were small groups of warriors returning from
their bloody work, and among them was Tawasuota.

He looked long at the spot where his home had stood; but it was gone,
and with it his family. Ah, the beautiful country of his ancestors! he
must depart from it forever, for he knew now that the white man would
occupy that land. Sadly he sang the spirit-song, and made his appeal to
the “Great Mystery,” excusing himself by the plea that what he had done
had been in the path of duty. There was no glory in it for him; he
could wear no eagle feather, nor could he ever recount the deed. It
was dreadful to him--the thought that he had fired upon an unarmed and
helpless man.

The chief soldier followed the broad trail of the fleeing host, and
after some hours he came upon a camp. There were no war-songs nor
dances there, as was their wont after a battle, but a strange stillness
reigned. Even the dogs scarcely barked at his approach; everything
seemed conscious of the awful carnage of the day.

He stopped at a tent and inquired after his beautiful wife and two
little sons, whom he had already trained to uphold their father’s
reputation, but was directed to his mother’s teepee.

“Ah, my son, my son, what have you done?” cried his old mother when she
saw him. “Come in, come in; let us eat together once more; for I have a
foreboding that it is for the last time. Alas, what have you done?”

Tawasuota silently entered the tent of his widowed mother, and his three
sisters gave him the place of honor.

“Mother, it is not right to blame our brother,” said the eldest. “He was
the chief’s head soldier; and if he had disobeyed his orders, he would
have been called a coward. That he could not bear.”

Food was handed him, and he swallowed a few mouthfuls, and gave back the
dish.

“You have not yet told me where she is, and the children,” he said with
a deep sigh.

“My son, my son, I have not, because it will give you pain. I wanted you
to eat first! She has been taken away by her own mother to Faribault,
among the white people. I could not persuade them to wait until you
came. Her people are lovers of the whites. They have even accepted their
religion,” grieved the good old mother.

Tawasuota’s head dropped upon his chest, and he sat silent for a long
time. The mother and three sisters were also silent, for they knew how
heavy his grief must be. At last he spoke.

“Mother, I am too proud to desert the tribe now and join my wife among
the white people. My brother-in-law may lie in my behalf, and say that
my hands are not stained with blood; but the spirits of those who died
to-day would rebuke me, and the rebuke would be just. No, I must fight
the whites until I die; and neither have I fought without cause; but I
must see my sons once more before I go.”

When Tawasuota left his mother’s teepee he walked fast across the circle
toward the council lodge to see Little Crow. He drew his blanket closely
about him, with his gun underneath. The keen eye of the wily chief
detected the severe expression upon the face of his guest, and he
hastened to speak first.

“There are times in the life of every great man when he must face
hardship and put self aside for the good of his people. You have done
well to-day!”

“I care little for myself,” replied Tawasuota, “but my heart is heavy
to-night. My wife and two boys have been taken away among the whites by
my mother-in-law. I fear for their safety, when it is known what we have
done.”

“Ugh, that old woman is too hasty in accepting the ways of the stranger
people!” exclaimed the chief.

“I am now on my way to see them,” declared Tawasuota.

“Ugh, ugh, I shall need you to-morrow! My plan is to attack the soldiers
at Fort Ridgeley with a strong force. There are not many. Then we shall
attack New Ulm and other towns. We will drive them all back into Saint
Paul and Fort Snelling.” Little Crow spoke with energy.

“You must stay,” he added, “and lead the attack either at the fort or at
New Ulm.”

For some minutes the chief soldier sat in silence.

At last he said simply, “I will do it.”

On the following day the attack was made, but it was unsuccessful. The
whole State was now alarmed, and all the frontier settlers left
alive had flocked to the larger and more protected towns. It had also
developed during the day that there was a large party of Sioux who were
ready to surrender, thereby showing that they had not been party to the
massacre nor indorsed the hasty action of the tribe.

At evening Tawasuota saw that there would be a long war with the whites,
and that the Indians must remove their families out of danger. The
feeling against all Indians was great. Night had brought him no relief
of mind, but it promised to shield him in a hazardous undertaking. He
consulted no one, but set out for the distant village of Faribault.

He kept to the flats back of the Minnesota, away from the well-traveled
roads, and moved on at a good gait, for he realized that he had to cover
a hundred miles in as few hours as possible. Every day that passed would
make it more difficult for him to rejoin his family.

Although he kept as far as he could from the settlements, he would come
now and then upon a solitary frame house, razed to the ground by the
war-parties of the day before. The members of the ill-fated family were
to be seen scattered in and about the place; and their white, upturned
faces told him that his race must pay for the deed.

The dog that howled pitifully over the dead was often the only survivor
of the farmer’s household.

Occasionally Tawasuota heard at a distance the wagons of the fugitives,
loaded with women and children, while armed men walked before and
behind. These caravans were usually drawn by oxen and moved slowly
toward some large town.

When the dawn appeared in the east, the chief soldier was compelled to
conceal himself in a secluded place. He rolled up in his blanket, lay
down in a dry creek-bed among the red willows and immediately fell
asleep.

With the next evening he resumed his journey, and reached Faribault
toward midnight. Even here every approach was guarded against the
possibility of an Indian attack. But there was much forest, and he knew
the country well. He reconnoitred, and soon found the Indian community,
but dared not approach and enter, for these Indians had allied
themselves with the whites; they would be charged with treachery if
it were known that they had received a hostile Sioux, and none were so
hated by the white people as Little Crow and his war-chief.

He chose a concealed position from which he might watch the movements of
his wife, if she were indeed there, and had not been waylaid and slain
on the journey hither.

That night was the hardest one that the warrior had ever known. If he
slept, it was only to dream of the war-whoop and attack; but at last he
found himself broad awake, the sun well up, and yes! there were his two
little sons, playing outside their teepee as of old. The next moment he
heard the voice of his wife from the deep woods wailing for her husband!

“Oh, take us, husband, take us with you! let us all die together!” she
pleaded as she clung to him whom she had regarded as already dead; for
she knew of the price that had been put upon his head, and that some
of the halfbreeds loved money better than the blood of their Indian
mothers.

Tawasuota stood for a minute without speaking, while his huge frame
trembled like a mighty pine beneath the thunderbolt.

“No,” he said at last. “I shall go, but you must remain. You are a
woman, and the white people need not know that your little boys are
mine. Bring them here to me this evening that I may kiss them farewell.”

The sun was hovering among the treetops when they met again.

“Atay! atay!” (“Papa, papa!”) the little fellows cried out in spite of
her cautions; but the mother put her finger to her lips, and they became
silent. Tawasuota took each boy in his arms, and held him close for a
few moments; he smiled to them, but large tears rolled down his cheeks.
Then he disappeared in the shadows, and they never saw him again.

The chief soldier lived and died a warrior and an enemy to the white
man; but one of his two sons became in after-years a minister of the
Christian gospel, under the “Long-Haired Praying Man,” Bishop Whipple,
of Minnesota.


VI. THE WHITE MAN’S ERRAND

Upon the wide tableland that lies at the back of a certain Indian
agency, a camp of a thousand teepees was pitched in a circle, according
to the ancient usage. In the center of the circle stood the council
lodge, where there were gathered together of an afternoon all the men
of years and distinction, some in blankets, some in uniform, and still
others clad in beggarly white man’s clothing. But the minds of all were
alike upon the days of their youth and freedom.

Around the council fire they passed and repassed the pipe of peace, and
when the big drum was struck they sang the accompaniment with sad yet
pleasant thoughts of the life that is past. Between the songs stories of
brave deeds and dangerous exploits were related by the actors in turn,
with as much spirit and zest as if they were still living in those days.

“Tum, tum, tum,” the drum was sounded.

“Oow, oow!” they hooted in a joyous chorus at the close of each refrain.

“Ho!” exclaimed finally the master of ceremonies for the evening. “It is
Zuyamani’s story of his great ride that we should now hear! It was
not far from this place, upon the Missouri River, and within the
recollection of many of us that this occurred. Ye young men must hear!”

“Ho, ho!” was the ready response of all present, and the drum was struck
once according to custom. The pipe was filled and handed to Zuyamani,
who gravely smoked for a few moments in silence. Then he related his
contribution to the unwritten history of our frontier in these words:

“It was during the winter following that summer in which General Sibley
pursued many of our people across the Muddy River (1863), that
we Hunkpatees, friendly Sioux, were camping at a place called
‘Hunt-the-Deer,’ about two miles from Fort Rice, Dakota Territory.

“The Chief Soldier of the garrison called one day upon the leading
chiefs of our band. To each one he said: ‘Lend me your bravest warrior!’
Each chief called his principal warriors together and laid the matter
before them.

“‘The Chief Soldier at this place,’ they explained, ‘wants to send a
message to Fort Berthold, where the Rees and Mandans live, to another
Chief Soldier there. The soldiers of the Great Father do not know the
way, neither could any of them get through the lines. He asks for a
brave man to carry his message.’

“The Mandans and the Rees were our hereditary enemies, but this was not
the principal reason for our hesitation. We had declared allegiance
to the Great Father at Washington; we had taken our stand against the
fighting men of our own nation, and the hostile Sioux were worse than
enemies to us at this time!

“Each chief had only called on his leading warriors, and each in turn
reported his failure to secure a volunteer.

“Then the Chief Soldier sent again and said: ‘Is there not a young
man among you who dares to face death? If he reaches the fort with my
message, he will need to be quick-witted as well as brave, and the Great
Father will not forget him!’

“Now all the chiefs together called all the young men in a great
council, and submitted to them the demand of the Great Father’s servant.
We knew well that the country between us and Fort Berthold, about one
hundred and fifty miles distant, was alive with hostile Sioux, and that
if any of us should be caught and recognized by them, he would surely
be put to death. It would not be easy to deceive them by professing
hostility to the Government, for the record of each individual Indian
is well known. The warriors were still unwilling to go, for they argued
thus: ‘This is a white man’s errand, and will not be recorded as a
brave deed upon the honor roll of our people.’ I think many would have
volunteered but for that belief. At that time we had not a high opinion
of the white man.

“Since all the rest were silent, it came into my mind to offer my
services. The warriors looked at me in astonishment, for I was a very
young man and had no experience.

“Our chief, Two Bears, who was my own uncle, finally presented my name
to the commanding officer. He praised my courage and begged me to
be vigilant. The interpreter told him that I had never been upon the
war-path and would be knocked over like a rabbit, but as no one else
would go, he was obliged to accept me as his messenger. He gave me a
fine horse and saddle; also a rifle and soldier’s uniform. I would not
take the gun nor wear the blue coat. I accepted only a revolver, and I
took my bow and quiver full of arrows, and wore my usual dress. I hid
the letter in my moccasin.

“I set out before daybreak the next morning. The snow was deep. I rode
up the river, on the west bank, keeping a very close watch all the way,
but seeing nothing. I had been provided with a pair of field glasses,
and I surveyed the country on all sides from the top of every hill.
Having traveled all day and part of the night, I rested my horse and I
took a little sleep.

“After eating a small quantity of pemmican, I made a very early start
in the morning. It was scarcely light when I headed for a near-by ridge
from which to survey the country beyond. Just as I ascended the rise I
found myself almost surrounded by loose ponies, evidently belonging to a
winter camp of the hostile Sioux.

“I readjusted my saddle, tightened the girths, and prepared to ride
swiftly around the camp. I saw some men already out after ponies. No one
appeared to have seen me as yet, but I felt that as soon as it became
lighter they could not help observing me. I turned to make the circuit
of the camp, which was a very large one, and as soon as I reached the
timbered bottom lands I began to congratulate myself that I had not been
seen.

“As I entered the woods at the crossing of a dry creek, I noticed that
my horse was nervous. I knew that horses are quick to discover animals
or men by scent, and I became nervous, too.

“The animal put his four feet together and almost slid down the steep
bank. As he came out on the opposite side he swerved suddenly and
started to run. Then I saw a man watching me from behind a tree.
Fortunately for me, he carried no weapon. He was out after ponies, and
had only a lariat wound upon one shoulder.

“He beckoned and made signs for me to stop, but I spurred my horse and
took flight at once. I could hear him yelling far behind me, no doubt to
arouse the camp and set them on my trail.

“As I fled westward, I came upon another man, mounted, and driving his
ponies before him. He yelled and hooted in vain; then turned and rode
after me. Two others had started in pursuit, but my horse was a good
one, and I easily outdistanced them at the start.

“After I had fairly circled the camp, I turned again toward the river,
hoping to regain the bottom lands. The traveling was bad. Sometimes we
came to deep gulches filled with snow, where my horse would sink in
up to his body and seem unable to move. When I jumped off his back and
struck him once or twice, he would make several desperate leaps and
recover his footing. My pursuers were equally hindered, but by this
time the pursuit was general, and in order to terrify me they yelled
continually and fired their guns into the air. Now and then I came to
a gulch which I had to follow up in search of a place to cross, and at
such times they gained on me. I began to despair, for I knew that the
white man’s horses have not the endurance of our Indian ponies, and I
expected to be chased most of the day.

“Finally I came to a ravine that seemed impossible to cross. As I
followed it up, it became evident that some of them had known of this
trap, and had cut in ahead of me. I felt that I must soon abandon my
horse and slide down the steep sides of the gulch to save myself.

“However, I made one last effort to pass my enemies. They came within
gunshot and several fired at me, although all our horses were going at
full speed. They missed me, and being at last clear of them, I came to a
place where I could cross, and the pursuit stopped.”

When Zuyamani reached this point in his recital, the great drum was
struck several times, and all the men cheered him.

“The days are short in winter,” he went on after a short pause, “and
just now the sun sank behind the hills. I did not linger. I continued my
journey by night, and reached Fort Berthold before midnight. I had been
so thoroughly frightened and was so much exhausted that I did not
want to talk, and as soon as I had delivered my letters to the post
commander, I went to the interpreter’s quarters to sleep.

“The interpreter, however, announced my arrival, and that same night
many Ree, Gros Ventre, and Mandan warriors came to call upon me. Among
them was a great chief of the Rees, called Poor Dog.

“‘You must be,’ said he to me, ‘either a very young man, or a fool! You
have not told us about your close escape, but a runner came in at dusk
and told us of the pursuit. He reported that you had been killed by
the hostiles, for he heard many guns fired about the middle of the
afternoon. These white men will never give you any credit for your
wonderful ride, nor will they compensate you for the risks you have
taken in their service. They will not give you so much as one eagle
feather for what you have done!’

“The next day I was sent for to go to headquarters, and there I related
my all-day pursuit by the hostile Sioux. The commanding officer advised
me to remain at the fort fifteen days before making the return trip,
thinking that by that time my enemies might cease to look for me.

“At the end of the fortnight he wrote his letters, and I told him that
I was ready to start. ‘I will give you,’ he said, ‘twenty Rees and Gros
Ventres to escort you past the hostile camp.’ We set out very early and
rode all day, so that night overtook us just before we reached the camp.

“At nightfall we sent two scouts ahead, but before they left us they
took the oath of the pipe in token of their loyalty. You all know the
ancient war custom. A lighted pipe was held toward them and each one
solemnly touched it, after which it was passed as usual.

“We followed more slowly, and at about midnight we came to the place
where our scouts had agreed to meet us. They were to return from a
reconnaissance of the camp and report on what they had seen. It was a
lonely spot, and the night was very cold and still. We sat there in the
snowy woods near a little creek and smoked in silence while we waited.
I had plenty of time to reflect upon my position. These Gros Ventres
and Rees have been our enemies for generations. I was one man to twenty!
They had their orders from the commander of the fort, and that was my
only safeguard.

“Soon we heard the howl of a wolf a little to the westward. Immediately
one of the party answered in the same manner. I could not have told
it from the howl of a real wolf. Then we heard a hooting owl down the
creek. Another of our party hooted like an owl.

“Presently the wolf’s voice sounded nearer, while the owl’s hoot came
nearer in the opposite direction. Then we heard the footsteps of ponies
on the crisp, frosty air. The scout who had been imitating the wolf came
in first, and the owl soon followed. The warriors made a ring and again
filled the pipe, and the scouts took the oath for the second time.

“After smoking, they reported a trail going up a stream tributary to the
Missouri, but whether going out or coming in it was impossible to tell
in the dark. It was several days old. This was discussed for some time.
The question was whether some had gone out in search of meat, or whether
some additional men had come into camp.

“The Bunch of Stars was already a little west of the middle sky when we
set out again. They agreed to take me a short distance beyond this creek
and there leave me, as they were afraid to go any further. On the bank
of the creek we took a farewell smoke. There was a faint glow in the
east, showing that it was almost morning. The warriors sang a ‘Strong
Heart’ song for me in an undertone as I went on alone.

“I tried to make a wide circuit of the camp, but I passed their ponies
grazing all over the side hills at a considerable distance, and I went
as quietly as possible, so as not to frighten them. When I had fairly
passed the camp I came down to the road again, and I let my horse fly!

“I had been cautioned at the post that the crossings of the creeks on
either side of the camp were the most dangerous places, since they would
be likely to watch for me there. I had left the second crossing far
behind, and I felt quite safe; but I was tired and chilled by the long
ride. My horse, too, began to show signs of fatigue. In a deep ravine
where there was plenty of dry wood and shelter, I cleared the ground of
snow and kindled a small fire. Then I gave the horse his last ration of
oats, and I ate the last of the pemmican that the Ree scouts had given
me.

“Suddenly he pricked up his ears in the direction of home. He ate a
mouthful and listened again. I began to grow nervous, and I listened,
too. Soon I heard the footsteps of horses in the snow at a considerable
distance.

“Hastily I mounted and took flight along the ravine until I had to come
out upon the open plain, in full view of a party of about thirty
Sioux in war-paint, coming back from the direction of Fort Rice. They
immediately gave chase, yelling and flourishing their guns and tomahawks
over their heads. I urged my horse to his best speed, for I felt that
if they should overtake me, nothing could save me! My friend, White Elk,
here, was one of that warparty.

“I saw that I had a fair lead and the best horse, and was gaining upon
them, when about two miles out I met some more of the party who had
lingered behind the rest. I was surrounded!

“I turned toward the north, to a deep gulch that I knew I should find
there, and I led my horse along a narrow and slippery ridge to a deep
hole. Here I took up my position. I guarded the pass with my bow and
arrows, and they could not reach me unless they should follow the ridge
in single file. I knew that they would not storm my position, for that
is not the Indian way of fighting, but I supposed that they would try
to tire me out. They yelled and hooted, and shot many bullets and arrows
over my head to terrify me into surrender, but I remained motionless and
silent.

“Night came, with a full round moon. All was light as day except the
place where I stood, half frozen and not daring to move. The bottom of
the gulch was as black as a well and almost as cold. The wolves howled
all around me in the stillness. At last I heard the footsteps of horses
retreating, and then no other sound. Still I dared not come out. I must
have slept, for it was dawn when I seemed to hear faintly the yelling of
warriors, and then I heard my own name.

“‘Zuyamani, tokiya nunka huwo?’ (Where are you, Zuyamani?) they shouted.
A party of my friends had come out to meet me and had followed our
trail. I was scarcely able to walk when I came out, but they filled the
pipe and held it up to me, as is done in recognition of distinguished
service. They escorted me into the post, singing war songs and songs of
brave deeds, and there I delivered up his letters to the Chief Soldier.”

Again the drum was struck and the old men cheered Zuyamani, who added:

“I think that Poor Dog was right, for the Great Father never gave me any
credit, nor did he ever reward me for what I had done. Yet I have not
been without honor, for my own people have not forgotten me, even though
I went upon the white man’s errand.”


VII. THE GRAVE OF THE DOG

The full moon was just clear of the high mountain ranges. Surrounded by
a ring of bluish haze, it looked almost as if it were frozen against the
impalpable blueblack of the reckless midwinter sky.

The game scout moved slowly homeward, well wrapped in his long buffalo
robe, which was securely belted to his strong loins; his quiver tightly
tied to his shoulders so as not to impede his progress. It was enough to
carry upon his feet two strong snow-shoes; for the snow was deep and its
crust too thin to bear his weight.

As he emerged from the lowlands into the upper regions, he loomed up
a gigantic figure against the clear, moonlit horizon. His picturesque
foxskin cap with all its trimmings was incrusted with frost from the
breath of his nostrils, and his lagging footfall sounded crisply. The
distance he had that day covered was enough for any human endurance; yet
he was neither faint nor hungry; but his feet were frozen into the psay,
the snow-shoes, so that he could not run faster than an easy slip and
slide.

At last he reached the much-coveted point--the crown of the last ascent;
and when he smelled fire and the savory odor of the jerked buffalo meat,
it well-nigh caused him to waver! But he must not fail to follow the
custom of untold ages, and give the game scout’s wolf call before
entering camp.

Accordingly he paused upon the highest point of the ridge and uttered
a cry to which the hungry cry of a real wolf would have seemed but a
coyote’s yelp in comparison! Then it was that the rest of the buffalo
hunters knew that their game scout was returning with welcome news; for
the unsuccessful scout enters the camp silently.

A second time he gave the call to assure his hearers that their ears
did not deceive them. The gray wolves received the news with perfect
understanding. It meant food! “Woo-o-o-o! woo-o-o-o!” came from all
directions, especially from the opposite ridge. Thus the ghostly, cold,
weird night was enlivened with the music from many wild throats.

Down the gradual slope the scout hastened; his footfall was the only
sound that broke the stillness after the answers to his call had ceased.
As he crossed a little ridge an immense wolf suddenly confronted him,
and instead of retreating, calmly sat up and gazed steadfastly into his
face.

“Welcome, welcome, friend!” the hunter spoke as he passed.

In the meantime, the hunters at the temporary camp were aroused to a
high pitch of excitement. Some turned their buffalo robes and put them
on in such a way as to convert themselves into make-believe bison, and
began to tread the snow, while others were singing the buffalo song,
that their spirits might be charmed and allured within the circle of
the camp-fires. The scout, too, was singing his buffalo bull song in a
guttural, lowing chant as he neared the hunting camp. Within arrow-shot
he paused again, while the usual ceremonies were enacted for his
reception. This done, he was seated with the leaders in a chosen place.

“It was a long run,” he said, “but there were no difficulties. I found
the first herd directly north of here. The second herd, a great one,
is northeast, near Shell Lake. The snow is deep. The buffalo can only
follow their leader in their retreat.”

“Hi, hi, hi!” the hunters exclaimed solemnly in token of gratitude,
raising their hands heavenward and then pointing them toward the ground.

“Ho, kola! one more round of the buffalo-pipe, then we shall retire, to
rise before daybreak for the hunt,” advised one of the leaders. Silently
they partook in turn of the long-stemmed pipe, and one by one, with a
dignified “Ho!” departed to their teepees.

The scout betook himself to his little old buffalo teepee, which he used
for winter hunting expeditions. His faithful Shunka, who had been all
this time its only occupant, met him at the entrance as dogs alone know
how to welcome a lifelong friend. As his master entered he stretched
himself in his old-time way, from the tip of his tail to that of his
tongue, and finished by curling both ends upward.

“Ho, mita shunka, eat this; for you must be hungry!” So saying, the
scout laid before his canine friend the last piece of his dried buffalo
meat. It was the sweetest meal ever eaten by a dog, judging by his long
smacking of his lips after he had swallowed it!

The hunting party was soon lost in heavy slumber. Not a sound could be
heard save the gnawing of the ponies upon the cottonwood bark, which was
provided for them instead of hay in the winter time.

All about Shell Lake the bison were gathered in great herds. The
unmistakable signs of the sky had warned them of approaching bad
weather. The moon’s robe was girdled with the rainbow wampum of heaven.
The very music of the snow under their feet had given them warning. On
the north side of Shell Lake there were several deep gulches, which were
the homes of every wanderer of the plains at such a time at this. When
there was a change toward severe weather, all the four-footed people
headed for this lake. Here was a heavy growth of reeds, rushes, and
coarse grass, making good shelters, and also springs, which afforded
water after the lake was frozen solid. Hence great numbers of the bison
had gathered here.

When Wapashaw, the game scout, had rolled himself in his warm buffalo
robe and was sound asleep, his faithful companion hunter, the great
Esquimaux wolf dog, silently rose and again stretched himself, then
stood quiet for a moment as if meditating. It was clear that he knew
well what he had planned to do, but was considering how he should do it
without arousing any suspicion of his movements. This is a dog’s art,
and the night tricks and marauding must always be the joy and secret of
his life!

Softly he emerged from the lodge and gave a sweeping glance around to
assure him that there were none to spy upon him. Suspiciously he sniffed
the air, as if to ascertain whether there could be any danger to his
sleeping master while he should be away.

His purpose was still a secret. It may be that it was not entirely a
selfish one, or merely the satisfying of his inherited traits. Having
fully convinced himself of the safety of the unguarded camp, he went
forth into the biting cold. The moon was now well up on the prairies of
the sky. There were no cloud hills in the blue field above to conceal
her from view. Her brilliant light set on fire every snow gem upon the
plains and hillsides about the hunters’ camp.

Up the long ascent he trotted in a northerly direction, yet not
following his master’s trail. He was large and formidable in strength,
combining the features of his wild brothers of the plains with those of
the dogs who keep company with the red men. His jet-black hair and sharp
ears and nose appeared to immense advantage against the spotless and
jeweled snow, until presently his own warm breath had coated him with
heavy frost.

After a time Shunka struck into his master’s trail and followed it all
the way, only taking a short cut here and there when by dog instinct he
knew that a man must go around such a point to get to his destination.
He met many travelers during the night, but none had dared to approach
him, though some few followed at a distance, as if to discover his
purpose.

At last he reached Shell Lake, and there beheld a great gathering of the
herds! They stood in groups, like enormous rocks, no longer black,
but white with frost. Every one of them emitted a white steam, quickly
frozen into a fine snow in the air.

Shunka sat upon his haunches and gazed.

“Wough, this is it!” he said to himself. He had kept still when the game
scout gave the wolf call, though the camp was in an uproar, and from
the adjacent hills the wild hunters were equally joyous, because they
understood the meaning of the unwonted noise. Yet his curiosity was not
fully satisfied, and he had set out to discover the truth, and it may be
to protect or serve his master in case of danger.

At daybreak the great dog meekly entered his master’s rude teepee, and
found him already preparing for the prospective hunt. He was filling his
inside moccasins full of buffalo hair to serve as stockings, over which
he put on his large buffalo moccasins with the hair inside, and adjusted
his warm leggings. He then adjusted his snowshoes and filled his quiver
full of good arrows. The dog quietly lay down in a warm place, making
himself as small as possible, as if to escape observation, and calmly
watched his master.

“Ho, ho, ho, kola! Enakanee, enakanee!” shouted the game herald. “It is
always best to get the game early; then their spirits can take flight
with the coming of a new day!”

All had now donned their snow-shoes. There was no food left; therefore
no delay to prepare breakfast.

“It is very propitious for our hunt,” one exclaimed; “everything is in
our favor. There is a good crust on the snow, and the promise of a good
clear day!”

Soon all the hunters were running in single file upon the trail of the
scout, each Indian closely followed by his trusty hunting dog. In less
than two hours they stood just back of the low ridge which rounded the
south side of Shell Lake. The narrow strip of land between its twin
divisions was literally filled with the bison. In the gulches beyond,
between the dark lines of timber, there were also scattered groups;
but the hunters at once saw their advantage over the herd upon the
peninsula.

“Hechetu, kola! This is well, friends!” exclaimed the first to speak.
“These can be forced to cross the slippery ice and the mire around the
springs. This will help us to get more meat. Our people are hungry, and
we must kill many in order to feed them!”

“Ho, ho, ho!” agreed all the hunters.

“And it is here that we can use our companion hunters best, for the
shunkas will intimidate and bewilder the buffalo women,” said an old
man.

“Ugh, he is always right! Our dogs must help us here. The meat will be
theirs as well as ours,” another added.

“Tosh, kola! The game scout’s dog is the greatest shunka of them all!
He has a mind near like that of a man. Let him lead the attack of his
fellows, while we crawl up on the opposite side and surround the buffalo
upon the slippery ice and in the deceitful mire,” spoke up a third. So
it was agreed that the game scout and his Shunka should lead the attack
of the dogs.

“Woo, woo, woo!” was the hoarse signal from the throat of the game
scout; but his voice was drowned by the howling and barking of the
savage dogs as they made their charge. In a moment all was confusion
among the buffalo. Some started this way, others that, and the great
mass swayed to and fro uncertainly. A few were ready to fight, but the
snow was too deep for a countercharge upon the dogs, save on the ice
just in front of them, where the wind had always full sweep. There all
was slippery and shining! In their excitement and confusion the bison
rushed upon this uncertain plain.

Their weight and the momentum of their rush carried them hopelessly far
out, where they were again confused as to which way to go, and many were
stuck in the mire which was concealed by the snow, except here and there
an opening above a spring from which there issued a steaming vapor.
The game scout and his valiant dog led on the force of canines with
deafening war-cries, and one could see black heads here and there
popping from behind the embankments. As the herd finally swept toward
the opposite shore, many dead were left behind. Pierced by the arrows of
the hunters, they lay like black mounds upon the glassy plain.

It was a great hunt! “Once more the camp will be fed,” they thought, “and
this good fortune will help us to reach the spring alive!”

A chant of rejoicing rang out from the opposite shore, while the game
scout unsheathed his big knife and began the work which is ever the
sequel of the hunt--to dress the game; although the survivors of the
slaughter had scarcely disappeared behind the hills. The dogs had all
run back to their respective masters, and this left the scout and
his companion Shunka alone. Some were appointed to start a camp in a
neighboring gulch among the trees, so that the hunters might bring their
meat there and eat before setting out for the great camp on the Big
River.

All were busily skinning and cutting up the meat into pieces convenient
for carrying, when suddenly a hunter called the attention of those near
him to an ominous change in the atmosphere.

“There are signs of a blizzard! We must hurry into the near woods before
it reaches us!” he shouted.

Some heard him; others did not. Those who saw or heard passed on the
signal and hurried toward the wood, where others had already arranged
rude shelters and gathered piles of dry wood for fuel.

Around the several camp-fires the hunters sat or stood, while slices
of savory meat were broiled and eaten with a relish by the half-starved
men.

“Ho, kola! Eat this, friend!” said they to one another as one finished
broiling a steak of the bison and offered it to his neighbor.

But the storm had now fairly enveloped them in whirling whiteness.
“Woo, woo!” they called to those who had not yet reached camp. One after
another answered and emerged from the blinding pall of snow. At last
none were missing save the game scout and his Shunka!

The hunters passed the time in eating and telling stories until a late
hour, occasionally giving a united shout to guide the lost one should he
chance to pass near their camp.

“Fear not for our scout, friends!” finally exclaimed a leader
among them. “He is a brave and experienced man. He will find a safe
resting-place, and join us when the wind ceases to rage.” So they all
wrapped themselves in their robes and lay down to sleep.

All that night and the following day it was impossible to give succor,
and the hunters felt much concern for the absent. Late in the second
night the great storm subsided.

“Ho, ho! Iyotanka! Rise up!” So the first hunter to awaken aroused all
the others.

As after every other storm, it was wonderfully still; so still that one
could hear distinctly the pounding feet of the jack-rabbits coming down
over the slopes to the willows for food. All dry vegetation was buried
beneath the deep snow, and everywhere they saw this white-robed creature
of the prairie coming down to the woods.

Now the air was full of the wolf and coyote game call, and they were
seen in great numbers upon the ice.

“See, see! the hungry wolves are dragging the carcasses away! Harken
to the war cries of the scout’s Shunka! Hurry, hurry!” they urged one
another in chorus.

Away they ran and out upon the lake; now upon the wind-swept ice, now
upon the crusted snow; running when they could, sliding when they must.
There was certainly a great concourse of the wolves, whirling in frantic
circles, but continually moving toward the farther end of the lake.
They could hear distinctly the hoarse bark of the scout’s Shunka, and
occasionally the muffled war-whoop of a man, as if it came from under
the ice!

As they approached nearer the scene they could hear more distinctly the
voice of their friend, but still as it were from underground. When they
reached the spot to which the wolves had dragged two of the carcasses of
the buffalo, Shunka was seen to stand by one of them, but at that moment
he staggered and fell. The hunters took out their knives and ripped up
the frozen hide covering the abdominal cavity. It revealed a warm nest
of hay and buffalo hair in which the scout lay, wrapped in his own robe!

He had placed his dog in one of the carcasses and himself in another for
protection from the storm; but the dog was wiser than the man, for
he kept his entrance open. The man lapped the hide over and it froze
solidly, shutting him securely in. When the hungry wolves came Shunka
promptly extricated himself and held them off as long as he could;
meanwhile, sliding and pulling, the wolves continued to drag over the
slippery ice the body of the buffalo in which his master had taken
refuge. The poor, faithful dog, with no care for his own safety, stood
by his imprisoned master until the hunters came up. But it was too late,
for he had received more than one mortal wound.

As soon as the scout got out, with a face more anxious for another than
for himself, he exclaimed:

“Where is Shunka, the bravest of his tribe?”

“Ho, kola, it is so, indeed; and here he lies,” replied one sadly.

His master knelt by his side, gently stroking the face of the dog.

“Ah, my friend; you go where all spirits live! The Great Mystery has a
home for every living creature. May he permit our meeting there!”

At daybreak the scout carried him up to one of the pretty round hills
overlooking the lake, and built up around him walls of loose stone. Red
paints were scattered over the snow, in accordance with Indian custom,
and the farewell song was sung.

Since that day the place has been known to the Sioux as
Shunkahanakapi--the Grave of the Dog.