BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.
THE CONFERENCE WITH MENELAUS.


Telemachus with Pisistratus arriving at Sparta, is hospitably received
by Menelaus to whom he relates the cause of his coming, and learns from
him many particulars of what befell the Greeks since the destruction of
Troy. He dwells more at large upon the prophecies of Proteus to him in
his return; from which he acquaints Telemachus that Ulysses is detained
in the island of Calypso.
    In the meantime the suitors consult to destroy Telemachus on the
    voyage home. Penelope is apprised of this; but comforted in a dream
    by Pallas, in the shape of her sister Iphthima.


And now proud Sparta with their wheels resounds,
Sparta whose walls a range of hills surrounds;
At the fair dome the rapid labour ends;
Where sate Atrides ’midst his bridal friends,
With double vows invoking Hymen’s power,
To bless his son’s and daughter’s nuptial hour.

That day, to great Achilles’ son resign’d,
Hermione, the fairest of her kind,
Was sent to crown the long-protracted joy,
Espoused before the final doom of Troy;
With steeds and gilded cars, a gorgeous train
Attend the nymphs to Phthia’s distant reign.
Meanwhile at home, to Megapenthe’s bed
The virgin choir Alector’s daughter led.
Brave Megapenthes from a stolen amour
To great Atrides’ age his handmaid bore;
To Helen’s bed the gods alone assign
Hermione, to extend the regal line;
On whom a radiant pomp of Graces wait,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.

While this gay friendly troop the king surround,
With festival and mirth the roofs resound;
A bard amid the joyous circle sings
High airs attemper’d to the vocal strings;
Whilst warbling to the varied strain, advance
Two sprightly youths to form the bounding dance,
’Twas then, that issuing through the palace gate,
The splendid car roll’d slow in regal state:
On the bright eminence young Nestor shone,
And fast beside him great Ulysses’ son;
Grave Eteoneus saw the pomp appear,
And speeding, thus address’d the royal ear;

“Two youths approach, whose semblant features prove
Their blood devolving from the source of Jove
Is due reception deign’d, or must they bend
Their doubtful course to seek a distant friend?”

“Insensate! (with a sigh the king replies,)
Too long, misjudging, have I thought thee wise
But sure relentless folly steels thy breast,
Obdurate to reject the stranger-guest;
To those dear hospitable rites a foe,
Which in my wanderings oft relieved my woe;
Fed by the bounty of another’s board,
Till pitying Jove my native realm restored—
Straight be the coursers from the car released,
Conduct the youths to grace the genial feast.”

The seneschal, rebuked, in haste withdrew;
With equal haste a menial train pursue: