The Wolf and the Crane

A Wolf had been gorging on an animal he had killed, when suddenly a
small bone in the meat stuck in his throat and he could not swallow it.
He soon felt terrible pain in his throat, and ran up and down groaning
and groaning and seeking for something to relieve the pain. He tried to
induce every one he met to remove the bone. “I would give anything,”
said he, “if you would take it out.” At last the Crane agreed to try,
and told the Wolf to lie on his side and open his jaws as wide as he
could. Then the Crane put its long neck down the Wolf’s throat, and
with its beak loosened the bone, till at last it got it out.

“Will you kindly give me the reward you promised?” said the Crane.

The Wolf grinned and showed his teeth and said: “Be content. You have
put your head inside a Wolf’s mouth and taken it out again in safety;
that ought to be reward enough for you.”

Gratitude and greed go not together.

The Man and the Serpent

A Countryman’s son by accident trod upon a Serpent’s tail, which turned
and bit him so that he died. The father in a rage got his axe, and
pursuing the Serpent, cut off part of its tail. So the Serpent in
revenge began stinging several of the Farmer’s cattle and caused him
severe loss. Well, the Farmer thought it best to make it up with the
Serpent, and brought food and honey to the mouth of its lair, and said
to it: “Let’s forget and forgive; perhaps you were right to punish my
son, and take vengeance on my cattle, but surely I was right in trying
to revenge him; now that we are both satisfied why should not we be
friends again?”

“No, no,” said the Serpent; “take away your gifts; you can never forget
the death of your son, nor I the loss of my tail.”

Injuries may be forgiven, but not forgotten.

The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse

Now you must know that a Town Mouse once upon a time went on a visit to
his cousin in the country. He was rough and ready, this cousin, but he
loved his town friend and made him heartily welcome. Beans and bacon,
cheese and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them freely.
The Town Mouse rather turned up his long nose at this country fare, and
said: “I cannot understand, Cousin, how you can put up with such poor
food as this, but of course you cannot expect anything better in the
country; come you with me and I will show you how to live. When you
have been in town a week you will wonder how you could ever have stood
a country life.” No sooner said than done: the two mice set off for the
town and arrived at the Town Mouse’s residence late at night. “You will
want some refreshment after our long journey,” said the polite Town
Mouse, and took his friend into the grand dining-room. There they found
the remains of a fine feast, and soon the two mice were eating up
jellies and cakes and all that was nice. Suddenly they heard growling
and barking. “What is that?” said the Country Mouse. “It is only the
dogs of the house,” answered the other. “Only!” said the Country Mouse.
“I do not like that music at my dinner.” Just at that moment the door
flew open, in came two huge mastiffs, and the two mice had to scamper
down and run off. “Good-bye, Cousin,” said the Country Mouse. “What!
going so soon?” said the other. “Yes,” he replied;

“Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and ale in fear.”