The Hares and the Frogs

The Hares were so persecuted by the other beasts, they did not know
where to go. As soon as they saw a single animal approach them, off
they used to run. One day they saw a troop of wild Horses stampeding
about, and in quite a panic all the Hares scuttled off to a lake hard
by, determined to drown themselves rather than live in such a continual
state of fear. But just as they got near the bank of the lake, a troop
of Frogs, frightened in their turn by the approach of the Hares
scuttled off, and jumped into the water. “Truly,” said one of the
Hares, “things are not so bad as they seem:

“There is always someone worse off than yourself.”

The Wolf and the Kid

A Kid was perched up on the top of a house, and looking down saw a Wolf
passing under him. Immediately he began to revile and attack his enemy.
“Murderer and thief,” he cried, “what do you here near honest folks’
houses? How dare you make an appearance where your vile deeds are
known?”

“Curse away, my young friend,” said the Wolf.

“It is easy to be brave from a safe distance.”

The Woodman and the Serpent

One wintry day a Woodman was tramping home from his work when he saw
something black lying on the snow. When he came closer he saw it was a
Serpent to all appearance dead. But he took it up and put it in his
bosom to warm while he hurried home. As soon as he got indoors he put
the Serpent down on the hearth before the fire. The children watched it
and saw it slowly come to life again. Then one of them stooped down to
stroke it, but the Serpent raised its head and put out its fangs and
was about to sting the child to death. So the Woodman seized his axe,
and with one stroke cut the Serpent in two. “Ah,” said he,

“No gratitude from the wicked.”

The Bald Man and the Fly

There was once a Bald Man who sat down after work on a hot summer’s
day. A Fly came up and kept buzzing about his bald pate, and stinging
him from time to time. The Man aimed a blow at his little enemy,
but—_whack_—his palm came on his head instead; again the Fly tormented
him, but this time the Man was wiser and said:

“You will only injure yourself if you take notice of despicable
enemies.”

The Fox and the Stork

At one time the Fox and the Stork were on visiting terms and seemed
very good friends. So the Fox invited the Stork to dinner, and for a
joke put nothing before her but some soup in a very shallow dish. This
the Fox could easily lap up, but the Stork could only wet the end of
her long bill in it, and left the meal as hungry as when she began. “I
am sorry,” said the Fox, “the soup is not to your liking.”

“Pray do not apologise,” said the Stork. “I hope you will return this
visit, and come and dine with me soon.” So a day was appointed when the
Fox should visit the Stork; but when they were seated at table all that
was for their dinner was contained in a very long-necked jar with a
narrow mouth, in which the Fox could not insert his snout, so all he
could manage to do was to lick the outside of the jar.

“I will not apologise for the dinner,” said the Stork:

“One bad turn deserves another.”