The Fox and the Mask

A Fox had by some means got into the store-room of a theatre. Suddenly
he observed a face glaring down on him and began to be very frightened;
but looking more closely he found it was only a Mask such as actors use
to put over their face. “Ah,” said the Fox, “you look very fine; it is
a pity you have not got any brains.”

Outside show is a poor substitute for inner worth.

The Jay and the Peacock

A Jay venturing into a yard where Peacocks used to walk, found there a
number of feathers which had fallen from the Peacocks when they were
moulting. He tied them all to his tail and strutted down towards the
Peacocks. When he came near them they soon discovered the cheat, and
striding up to him pecked at him and plucked away his borrowed plumes.
So the Jay could do no better than go back to the other Jays, who had
watched his behaviour from a distance; but they were equally annoyed
with him, and told him:

“It is not only fine feathers that make fine birds.”

The Frog and the Ox

“Oh Father,” said a little Frog to the big one sitting by the side of a
pool, “I have seen such a terrible monster! It was as big as a
mountain, with horns on its head, and a long tail, and it had hoofs
divided in two.”

“Tush, child, tush,” said the old Frog, “that was only Farmer White’s
Ox. It isn’t so big either; he may be a little bit taller than I, but I
could easily make myself quite as broad; just you see.” So he blew
himself out, and blew himself out, and blew himself out. “Was he as big
as that?” asked he.

“Oh, much bigger than that,” said the young Frog.

Again the old one blew himself out, and asked the young one if the Ox
was as big as that.

“Bigger, father, bigger,” was the reply.

So the Frog took a deep breath, and blew and blew and blew, and swelled
and swelled and swelled. And then he said: “I’m sure the Ox is not as
big as this. But at this moment he burst.

Self-conceit may lead to self-destruction.

Androcles

A slave named Androcles once escaped from his master and fled to the
forest. As he was wandering about there he came upon a Lion lying down
moaning and groaning. At first he turned to flee, but finding that the
Lion did not pursue him, he turned back and went up to him. As he came
near, the Lion put out his paw, which was all swollen and bleeding, and
Androcles found that a huge thorn had got into it, and was causing all
the pain. He pulled out the thorn and bound up the paw of the Lion, who
was soon able to rise and lick the hand of Androcles like a dog. Then
the Lion took Androcles to his cave, and every day used to bring him
meat from which to live. But shortly afterwards both Androcles and the
Lion were captured, and the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the
Lion, after the latter had been kept without food for several days. The
Emperor and all his Court came to see the spectacle, and Androcles was
led out into the middle of the arena. Soon the Lion was let loose from
his den, and rushed bounding and roaring towards his victim. But as
soon as he came near to Androcles he recognised his friend, and fawned
upon him, and licked his hands like a friendly dog. The Emperor,
surprised at this, summoned Androcles to him, who told him the whole
story. Whereupon the slave was pardoned and freed, and the Lion let
loose to his native forest.

Gratitude is the sign of noble souls.