The Belly and the Members

One fine day it occurred to the Members of the Body that they were
doing all the work and the Belly was having all the food. So they held
a meeting, and after a long discussion, decided to strike work till the
Belly consented to take its proper share of the work. So for a day or
two, the Hands refused to take the food, the Mouth refused to receive
it, and the Teeth had no work to do. But after a day or two the Members
began to find that they themselves were not in a very active condition:
the Hands could hardly move, and the Mouth was all parched and dry,
while the Legs were unable to support the rest. So thus they found that
even the Belly in its dull quiet way was doing necessary work for the
Body, and that all must work together or the Body will go to pieces.

The Hart in the Ox-Stall

A Hart hotly pursued by the hounds fled for refuge into an ox-stall,
and buried itself in a truss of hay, leaving nothing to be seen but the
tips of his horns. Soon after the Hunters came up and asked if any one
had seen the Hart. The stable boys, who had been resting after their
dinner, looked round, but could see nothing, and the Hunters went away.
Shortly afterwards the master came in, and looking round, saw that
something unusual had taken place. He pointed to the truss of hay and
said: “What are those two curious things sticking out of the hay?” And
when the stable boys came to look they discovered the Hart, and soon
made an end of him. He thus learnt that

Nothing escapes the master’s eye.

The Fox and the Grapes

One hot summer’s day a Fox was strolling through an orchard till he
came to a bunch of Grapes just ripening on a vine which had been
trained over a lofty branch. “Just the thing to quench my thirst,”
quoth he. Drawing back a few paces, he took a run and a jump, and just
missed the bunch. Turning round again with a One, Two, Three, he jumped
up, but with no greater success. Again and again he tried after the
tempting morsel, but at last had to give it up, and walked away with
his nose in the air, saying: “I am sure they are sour.”

It is easy to despise what you cannot get.

The Peacock and Juno

A Peacock once placed a petition before Juno desiring to have the voice
of a nightingale in addition to his other attractions; but Juno refused
his request. When he persisted, and pointed out that he was her
favourite bird, she said:

“Be content with your lot; one cannot be first in everything.”

The Horse, Hunter, and Stag

A quarrel had arisen between the Horse and the Stag, so the Horse came
to a Hunter to ask his help to take revenge on the Stag. The Hunter
agreed, but said: “If you desire to conquer the Stag, you must permit
me to place this piece of iron between your jaws, so that I may guide
you with these reins, and allow this saddle to be placed upon your back
so that I may keep steady upon you as we follow after the enemy.” The
Horse agreed to the conditions, and the Hunter soon saddled and bridled
him. Then with the aid of the Hunter the Horse soon overcame the Stag,
and said to the Hunter: “Now, get off, and remove those things from my
mouth and back.”

“Not so fast, friend,” said the Hunter. “I have now got you under bit
and spur, and prefer to keep you as you are at present.”

If you allow men to use you for your own purposes, they will use you
for theirs.