The Fox and the Mosquitoes

A Fox after crossing a river got its tail entangled in a bush, and
could not move. A number of Mosquitoes seeing its plight settled upon
it and enjoyed a good meal undisturbed by its tail. A hedgehog
strolling by took pity upon the Fox and went up to him: “You are in a
bad way, neighbour,” said the hedgehog; “shall I relieve you by driving
off those Mosquitoes who are sucking your blood?”

“Thank you, Master Hedgehog,” said the Fox, “but I would rather not.”

“Why, how is that?” asked the hedgehog.

“Well, you see,” was the answer, “these Mosquitoes have had their fill;
if you drive these away, others will come with fresh appetite and bleed
me to death.”

The Fox Without a Tail

It happened that a Fox caught its tail in a trap, and in struggling to
release himself lost all of it but the stump. At first he was ashamed
to show himself among his fellow foxes. But at last he determined to
put a bolder face upon his misfortune, and summoned all the foxes to a
general meeting to consider a proposal which he had to place before
them. When they had assembled together the Fox proposed that they
should all do away with their tails. He pointed out how inconvenient a
tail was when they were pursued by their enemies, the dogs; how much it
was in the way when they desired to sit down and hold a friendly
conversation with one another. He failed to see any advantage in
carrying about such a useless encumbrance. “That is all very well,”
said one of the older foxes; “but I do not think you would have
recommended us to dispense with our chief ornament if you had not
happened to lose it yourself.”

Distrust interested advice.

The One-Eyed Doe

A Doe had had the misfortune to lose one of her eyes, and could not see
any one approaching her on that side. So to avoid any danger she always
used to feed on a high cliff near the sea, with her sound eye looking
towards the land. By this means she could see whenever the hunters
approached her on land, and often escaped by this means. But the
hunters found out that she was blind of one eye, and hiring a boat
rowed under the cliff where she used to feed and shot her from the sea.
“Ah,” cried she with her dying voice,

“You cannot escape your fate.”

Belling the Cat

Long ago, the mice had a general council to consider what measures they
could take to outwit their common enemy, the Cat. Some said this, and
some said that; but at last a young mouse got up and said he had a
proposal to make, which he thought would meet the case. “You will all
agree,” said he, “that our chief danger consists in the sly and
treacherous manner in which the enemy approaches us. Now, if we could
receive some signal of her approach, we could easily escape from her. I
venture, therefore, to propose that a small bell be procured, and
attached by a ribbon round the neck of the Cat. By this means we should
always know when she was about, and could easily retire while she was
in the neighbourhood.”

This proposal met with general applause, until an old mouse got up and
said: “That is all very well, but who is to bell the Cat?” The mice
looked at one another and nobody spoke. Then the old mouse said:

“It is easy to propose impossible remedies.”