The Nurse and the Wolf

“Be quiet now,” said an old Nurse to a child sitting on her lap. “If
you make that noise again I will throw you to the Wolf.”

Now it chanced that a Wolf was passing close under the window as this
was said. So he crouched down by the side of the house and waited. “I
am in good luck to-day,” thought he. “It is sure to cry soon, and a
daintier morsel I haven’t had for many a long day.” So he waited, and
he waited, and he waited, till at last the child began to cry, and the
Wolf came forward before the window, and looked up to the Nurse,
wagging his tail. But all the Nurse did was to shut down the window and
call for help, and the dogs of the house came rushing out. “Ah,” said
the Wolf as he galloped away,

“Enemies’ promises were made to be broken.”

The Tortoise and the Birds

A Tortoise desired to change its place of residence, so he asked an
Eagle to carry him to his new home, promising her a rich reward for her
trouble. The Eagle agreed and seizing the Tortoise by the shell with
her talons soared aloft. On their way they met a Crow, who said to the
Eagle: “Tortoise is good eating.” “The shell is too hard,” said the
Eagle in reply. “The rocks will soon crack the shell,” was the Crow’s
answer; and the Eagle, taking the hint, let fall the Tortoise on a
sharp rock, and the two birds made a hearty meal of the Tortoise.

Never soar aloft on an enemy’s pinions.

The Two Crabs

One fine day two Crabs came out from their home to take a stroll on the
sand. “Child,” said the mother, “you are walking very ungracefully. You
should accustom yourself, to walking straight forward without twisting
from side to side.”

“Pray, mother,” said the young one, “do but set the example yourself,
and I will follow you.”

Example is the best precept.

The Ass in the Lion’s Skin

An Ass once found a Lion’s skin which the hunters had left out in the
sun to dry. He put it on and went towards his native village. All fled
at his approach, both men and animals, and he was a proud Ass that day.
In his delight he lifted up his voice and brayed, but then every one
knew him, and his owner came up and gave him a sound cudgelling for the
fright he had caused. And shortly afterwards a Fox came up to him and
said: “Ah, I knew you by your voice.”

Fine clothes may disguise, but silly words will disclose a fool.

The Two Fellows and the Bear

Two Fellows were travelling together through a wood, when a Bear rushed
out upon them. One of the travellers happened to be in front, and he
seized hold of the branch of a tree, and hid himself among the leaves.
The other, seeing no help for it, threw himself flat down upon the
ground, with his face in the dust. The Bear, coming up to him, put his
muzzle close to his ear, and sniffed and sniffed. But at last with a
growl he shook his head and slouched off, for bears will not touch dead
meat. Then the fellow in the tree came down to his comrade, and,
laughing, said “What was it that Master Bruin whispered to you?”

“He told me,” said the other,

“Never trust a friend who deserts you at a pinch.”