The Man and the Satyr

A Man had lost his way in a wood one bitter winter’s night. As he was
roaming about, a Satyr came up to him, and finding that he had lost his
way, promised to give him a lodging for the night, and guide him out of
the forest in the morning. As he went along to the Satyr’s cell, the
Man raised both his hands to his mouth and kept on blowing at them.
“What do you do that for?” said the Satyr.

“My hands are numb with the cold,” said the Man, “and my breath warms
them.”

After this they arrived at the Satyr’s home, and soon the Satyr put a
smoking dish of porridge before him. But when the Man raised his spoon
to his mouth he began blowing upon it. “And what do you do that for?”
said the Satyr.

“The porridge is too hot, and my breath will cool it.”

“Out you go,” said the Satyr. “I will have nought to do with a man who
can blow hot and cold with the same breath.”

The Goose With the Golden Eggs

One day a countryman going to the nest of his Goose found there an egg
all yellow and glittering. When he took it up it was as heavy as lead
and he was going to throw it away, because he thought a trick had been
played upon him. But he took it home on second thoughts, and soon found
to his delight that it was an egg of pure gold. Every morning the same
thing occurred, and he soon became rich by selling his eggs. As he grew
rich he grew greedy; and thinking to get at once all the gold the Goose
could give, he killed it and opened it only to find nothing.

Greed oft o’er reaches itself.

The Labourer and the Nightingale

A Labourer lay listening to a Nightingale’s song throughout the summer
night. So pleased was he with it that the next night he set a trap for
it and captured it. “Now that I have caught thee,” he cried, “thou
shalt always sing to me.”

“We Nightingales never sing in a cage.” said the bird.

“Then I’ll eat thee.” said the Labourer. “I have always heard say that
a nightingale on toast is dainty morsel.”

“Nay, kill me not,” said the Nightingale; “but let me free, and I’ll
tell thee three things far better worth than my poor body.” The
Labourer let him loose, and he flew up to a branch of a tree and said:
“Never believe a captive’s promise; that’s one thing. Then again: Keep
what you have. And third piece of advice is: Sorrow not over what is
lost forever.” Then the song-bird flew away.

The Fox, the Cock, and the Dog

One moonlight night a Fox was prowling about a farmer’s hen-coop, and
saw a Cock roosting high up beyond his reach. “Good news, good news!”
he cried.

“Why, what is that?” said the Cock.

“King Lion has declared a universal truce. No beast may hurt a bird
henceforth, but all shall dwell together in brotherly friendship.”

“Why, that is good news,” said the Cock; “and there I see some one
coming, with whom we can share the good tidings.” And so saying he
craned his neck forward and looked afar off.

“What is it you see?” said the Fox.

“It is only my master’s Dog that is coming towards us. What, going so
soon?” he continued, as the Fox began to turn away as soon as he had
heard the news. “Will you not stop and congratulate the Dog on the
reign of universal peace?”

“I would gladly do so,” said the Fox, “but I fear he may not have heard
of King Lion’s decree.”

Cunning often outwits itself.