Aesop’s Fables

The Cock and the Pearl

A cock was once strutting up and down the farmyard among the hens when
suddenly he espied something shinning amid the straw. “Ho! ho!” quoth
he, “that’s for me,” and soon rooted it out from beneath the straw.
“What did it turn out to be but a Pearl that by some chance had been
lost in the yard? “You may be a treasure,” quoth Master Cock, “to men
that prize you, but for me I would rather have a single barley-corn
than a peck of pearls.”

Precious things are for those that can prize them.

The Wolf and the Lamb

Once upon a time a Wolf was lapping at a spring on a hillside, when,
looking up, what should he see but a Lamb just beginning to drink a
little lower down. “There’s my supper,” thought he, “if only I can find
some excuse to seize it.” Then he called out to the Lamb, “How dare you
muddle the water from which I am drinking?”

“Nay, master, nay,” said Lambikin; “if the water be muddy up there, I
cannot be the cause of it, for it runs down from you to me.”

“Well, then,” said the Wolf, “why did you call me bad names this time
last year?”

“That cannot be,” said the Lamb; “I am only six months old.”

“I don’t care,” snarled the Wolf; “if it was not you it was your
father;” and with that he rushed upon the poor little Lamb and

WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA

ate her all up. But before she died she gasped out—

“Any excuse will serve a tyrant.”

The Dog and the Shadow

It happened that a Dog had got a piece of meat and was carrying it home
in his mouth to eat it in peace. Now on his way home he had to cross a
plank lying across a running brook. As he crossed, he looked down and
saw his own shadow reflected in the water beneath. Thinking it was
another dog with another piece of meat, he made up his mind to have
that also. So he made a snap at the shadow in the water, but as he
opened his mouth the piece of meat fell out, dropped into the water and
was never seen more.

Beware lest you lose the substance by grasping at the shadow.

The Lion’s Share

The Lion went once a-hunting along with the Fox, the Jackal, and the
Wolf. They hunted and they hunted till at last they surprised a Stag,
and soon took its life. Then came the question how the spoil should be
divided. “Quarter me this Stag,” roared the Lion; so the other animals
skinned it and cut it into four parts. Then the Lion took his stand in
front of the carcass and pronounced judgment: The first quarter is for
me in my capacity as King of Beasts; the second is mine as arbiter;
another share comes to me for my part in the chase; and as for the
fourth quarter, well, as for that, I should like to see which of you
will dare to lay a paw upon it.”

“Humph,” grumbled the Fox as he walked away with his tail between his
legs; but he spoke in a low growl—

“You may share the labours of the great, but you will not share the
spoil.”