With the invention of printing the European book of Æsop was compiled
about 1480 by Heinrich Stainhöwel, who put together the Romulus with
selections from Avian, some of the Greek prose versions of Babrius from
Ranuzio’s translation, and a few from Alfred’s Æsop. To these he added
the legendary life of Æsop and a selection of somewhat loose tales from
Petrus Alphonsi and Poggio Bracciolini, corresponding to the Milesian
and Sybaritic tales which were associated with the Fable in antiquity.
Stainhöwel translated all this into German, and within twenty years his
collection had been turned into French, English (by Caxton, in 1484),
Italian, Dutch, and Spanish. Additions were made to it by Brandt and
Waldis in Germany, by L’Estrange in England, and by La Fontaine in
France; these were chiefly from the larger Greek collections published
after Stainhöwel’s day, and, in the case of La Fontaine, from Bidpai
and other Oriental sources. But these additions have rarely taken hold,
and the Æsop of modern Europe is in large measure Stainhöwel’s, even to
the present day. The first three quarters of the present collection are
Stainhöwel mainly in Stainhöwel’s order. Selections from it passed into
spelling and reading books, and made the Fables part of modern European
folk-lore.[5]

 [5] An episode in the history of the modern Æsop deserves record, if
 only to illustrate the law that Æsop always begins his career as a
 political weapon in a new home. When a selection of the Fables were
 translated into Chinese in 1840 they became favourite reading with the
 officials, till a high dignitary said, “This is clearly directed
 against _us_,” and ordered Æsop to be included in the Chinese _Index
 Expurgatorius_ (R. Morris, _Cont. Rev_. xxxix. p. 731).

We may conclude this history of Æsop with a similar account of the
progress of Æsopic investigation. First came collection; the Greek Æsop
was brought together by Neveletus in 1610, the Latin by Nilant in 1709.
The main truth about the former was laid down by the master-hand of
Bentley during a skirmish in the Battle of the Books; the equally great
critic Lessing began to unravel the many knotty points connected with
the medieval Latin Æsop. His investigations have been carried on and
completed by three Frenchmen in the present century, Robert, Du Méril,
and Hervieux; while three Germans, Crusius, Benfey, and Mall, have
thrown much needed light on Babrius, on the Oriental Æsop, and on Marie
de France. Lastly, I have myself brought together these various lines
of inquiry, and by adding a few threads of my own, have been able to
weave them all for the first time into a consistent pattern.[6]

 [6] _The Fables of Æsop, as first printed by William Caxton in_ 1484,
 _now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs_ (London, 1889), 2
 vols., the first containing a History of the Æsopic Fable.

So much for the past of the Fable. Has it a future as a mode of
literary expression? Scarcely; its method is at once too simple and too
roundabout. Too roundabout; for the truths we have to tell we prefer to
speak out directly and not by way of allegory. And the truths the Fable
has to teach are too simple to correspond to the facts of our complex
civilisation; its rude _graffiti_ of human nature cannot reproduce the
subtle gradations of modern life. But as we all pass through in our
lives the various stages of ancestral culture, there comes a time when
these rough sketches of life have their appeal to us as they had for
our forefathers. The allegory gives us a pleasing and not too strenuous
stimulation of the intellectual powers; the lesson is not too
complicated for childlike minds. Indeed, in their grotesque grace, in
their quaint humour, in their trust in the simpler virtues, in their
insight into the cruder vices, in their innocence of the fact of sex,
Æsop’s Fables are as little children. They are as little children, and
for that reason they will for ever find a home in the heaven of little
children’s souls.