The Swallow and the Other Birds

It happened that a Countryman was sowing some hemp seeds in a field
where a Swallow and some other birds were hopping about picking up
their food. “Beware of that man,” quoth the Swallow. “Why, what is he
doing?” said the others. “That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful to
pick up every one of the seeds, or else you will repent it.” The birds
paid no heed to the Swallow’s words, and by and by the hemp grew up and
was made into cord, and of the cords nets were made, and many a bird
that had despised the Swallow’s advice was caught in nets made out of
that very hemp. “What did I tell you?” said the Swallow.

Destroy the seed of evil, or it will grow up to your ruin.

The Frogs Desiring a King

The Frogs were living as happy as could be in a marshy swamp that just
suited them; they went splashing about caring for nobody and nobody
troubling with them. But some of them thought that this was not right,
that they should have a king and a proper constitution, so they
determined to send up a petition to Jove to give them what they wanted.
“Mighty Jove,” they cried, “send unto us a king that will rule over us
and keep us in order.” Jove laughed at their croaking, and threw down
into the swamp a huge Log, which came down splashing into the swamp.
The Frogs were frightened out of their lives by the commotion made in
their midst, and all rushed to the bank to look at the horrible
monster; but after a time, seeing that it did not move, one or two of
the boldest of them ventured out towards the Log, and even dared to
touch it; still it did not move. Then the greatest hero of the Frogs
jumped upon the Log and commenced dancing up and down upon it,
thereupon all the Frogs came and did the same; and for some time the
Frogs went about their business every day without taking the slightest
notice of their new King Log lying in their midst. But this did not
suit them, so they sent another petition to Jove, and said to him, “We
want a real king; one that will really rule over us.” Now this made
Jove angry, so he sent among them a big Stork that soon set to work
gobbling them all up. Then the Frogs repented when too late.

Better no rule than cruel rule.

The Mountains in Labour

One day the Countrymen noticed that the Mountains were in labour; smoke
came out of their summits, the earth was quaking at their feet, trees
were crashing, and huge rocks were tumbling. They felt sure that
something horrible was going to happen. They all gathered together in
one place to see what terrible thing this could be. They waited and
they waited, but nothing came. At last there was a still more violent
earthquake, and a huge gap appeared in the side of the Mountains. They
all fell down upon their knees and waited. At last, and at last, a
teeny, tiny mouse poked its little head and bristles out of the gap and
came running down towards them, and ever after they used to say:

“Much outcry, little outcome.”