The Fox and the Lion

When first the Fox saw the Lion he was terribly frightened, and ran
away and hid himself in the wood. Next time however he came near the
King of Beasts he stopped at a safe distance and watched him pass by.
The third time they came near one another the Fox went straight up to
the Lion and passed the time of day with him, asking him how his family
were, and when he should have the pleasure of seeing him again; then
turning his tail, he parted from the Lion without much ceremony.

Familiarity breeds contempt.

The Lion and the Statue

A Man and a Lion were discussing the relative strength of men and lions
in general. The Man contended that he and his fellows were stronger
than lions by reason of their greater intelligence. “Come now with me,”
he cried, “and I will soon prove that I am right.” So he took him into
the public gardens and showed him a statue of Hercules overcoming the
Lion and tearing his mouth in two.

“That is all very well,” said the Lion, “but proves nothing, for it was
a man who made the statue.”

We can easily represent things as we wish them to be.

The Ant and the Grasshopper

In a field one summer’s day a Grasshopper was hopping about, chirping
and singing to its heart’s content. An Ant passed by, bearing along
with great toil an ear of corn he was taking to the nest.

“Why not come and chat with me,” said the Grasshopper, “instead of
toiling and moiling in that way?”

“I am helping to lay up food for the winter,” said the Ant, “and
recommend you to do the same.”

“Why bother about winter?” said the Grasshopper; we have got plenty of
food at present.” But the Ant went on its way and continued its toil.
When the winter came the Grasshopper had no food and found itself dying
of hunger, while it saw the ants distributing every day corn and grain
from the stores they had collected in the summer. Then the Grasshopper
knew:

It is best to prepare for the days of necessity.

The Tree and the Reed

“Well, little one,” said a Tree to a Reed that was growing at its foot,
“why do you not plant your feet deeply in the ground, and raise your
head boldly in the air as I do?”

“I am contented with my lot,” said the Reed. “I may not be so grand,
but I think I am safer.”

“Safe!” sneered the Tree. “Who shall pluck me up by the roots or bow my
head to the ground?” But it soon had to repent of its boasting, for a
hurricane arose which tore it up from its roots, and cast it a useless
log on the ground, while the little Reed, bending to the force of the
wind, soon stood upright again when the storm had passed over.

Obscurity often brings safety.