The Fox and the Crow

A Fox once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese in its beak and
settle on a branch of a tree. “That’s for me, as I am a Fox,” said
Master Reynard, and he walked up to the foot of the tree. “Good-day,
Mistress Crow,” he cried. “How well you are looking to-day: how glossy
your feathers; how bright your eye. I feel sure your voice must surpass
that of other birds, just as your figure does; let me hear but one song
from you that I may greet you as the Queen of Birds.” The Crow lifted
up her head and began to caw her best, but the moment she opened her
mouth the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be snapped up by
Master Fox. “That will do,” said he. “That was all I wanted. In
exchange for your cheese I will give you a piece of advice for the
future—

“Do not trust flatterers.”

The Flatter doth rob by stealth,
His victim, both of Wit and Wealth.

The Sick Lion

A Lion had come to the end of his days and lay sick unto death at the
mouth of his cave, gasping for breath. The animals, his subjects, came
round him and drew nearer as he grew more and more helpless. When they
saw him on the point of death they thought to themselves: “Now is the
time to pay off old grudges.” So the Boar came up and drove at him with
his tusks; then a Bull gored him with his horns; still the Lion lay
helpless before them: so the Ass, feeling quite safe from danger, came
up, and turning his tail to the Lion kicked up his heels into his face.
“This is a double death,” growled the Lion.

Only cowards insult dying majesty.

The Ass and the Lapdog

A Farmer one day came to the stables to see to his beasts of burden:
among them was his favourite Ass, that was always well fed and often
carried his master. With the Farmer came his Lapdog, who danced about
and licked his hand and frisked about as happy as could be. The Farmer
felt in his pocket, gave the Lapdog some dainty food, and sat down
while he gave his orders to his servants. The Lapdog jumped into his
master’s lap, and lay there blinking while the Farmer stroked his ears.
The Ass, seeing this, broke loose from his halter and commenced
prancing about in imitation of the Lapdog. The Farmer could not hold
his sides with laughter, so the Ass went up to him, and putting his
feet upon the Farmer’s shoulder attempted to climb into his lap. The
Farmer’s servants rushed up with sticks and pitchforks and soon taught
the Ass that

Clumsy jesting is no joke.

The Lion and the Mouse

Once when a Lion was asleep a little Mouse began running up and down
upon him; this soon wakened the Lion, who placed his huge paw upon him,
and opened his big jaws to swallow him. “Pardon, O King,” cried the
little Mouse: “forgive me this time, I shall never forget it: who knows
but what I may be able to do you a turn some of these days?” The Lion
was so tickled at the idea of the Mouse being able to help him, that he
lifted up his paw and let him go. Some time after the Lion was caught
in a trap, and the hunters who desired to carry him alive to the King,
tied him to a tree while they went in search of a waggon to carry him
on. Just then the little Mouse happened to pass by, and seeing the sad
plight in which the Lion was, went up to him and soon gnawed away the
ropes that bound the King of the Beasts. “Was I not right?” said the
little Mouse.

Little friends may prove great friends.