The Two Pots

Two Pots had been left on the bank of a river, one of brass, and one of
earthenware. When the tide rose they both floated off down the stream.
Now the earthenware pot tried its best to keep aloof from the brass
one, which cried out: “Fear nothing, friend, I will not strike you.”

“But I may come in contact with you,” said the other, “if I come too
close; and whether I hit you, or you hit me, I shall suffer for it.”

The strong and the weak cannot keep company.

The Four Oxen and the Lion

A Lion used to prowl about a field in which Four Oxen used to dwell.
Many a time he tried to attack them; but whenever he came near they
turned their tails to one another, so that whichever way he approached
them he was met by the horns of one of them. At last, however, they
fell a-quarrelling among themselves, and each went off to pasture alone
in a separate corner of the field. Then the Lion attacked them one by
one and soon made an end of all four.

United we stand, divided we fall.

The Fisher and the Little Fish

It happened that a Fisher, after fishing all day, caught only a little
fish. “Pray, let me go, master,” said the Fish. “I am much too small
for your eating just now. If you put me back into the river I shall
soon grow, then you can make a fine meal off me.”

“Nay, nay, my little Fish,” said the Fisher, “I have you now. I may not
catch you hereafter.”

A little thing in hand is worth more than a great thing in prospect.

Avaricious and Envious

Two neighbours came before Jupiter and prayed him to grant their
hearts’ desire. Now the one was full of avarice, and the other eaten up
with envy. So to punish them both, Jupiter granted that each might have
whatever he wished for himself, but only on condition that his
neighbour had twice as much. The Avaricious man prayed to have a room
full of gold. No sooner said than done; but all his joy was turned to
grief when he found that his neighbour had two rooms full of the
precious metal. Then came the turn of the Envious man, who could not
bear to think that his neighbour had any joy at all. So he prayed that
he might have one of his own eyes put out, by which means his companion
would become totally blind.

Vices are their own punishment.

The Crow and the Pitcher

A Crow, half-dead with thirst, came upon a Pitcher which had once been
full of water; but when the Crow put its beak into the mouth of the
Pitcher he found that only very little water was left in it, and that
he could not reach far enough down to get at it. He tried, and he
tried, but at last had to give up in despair. Then a thought came to
him, and he took a pebble and dropped it into the Pitcher. Then he took
another pebble and dropped it into the Pitcher. Then he took another
pebble and dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble
and dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and
dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and dropped
that into the Pitcher. At last, at last, he saw the water mount up near
him, and after casting in a few more pebbles he was able to quench his
thirst and save his life.

Little by little does the trick.