The Shepherd’s Boy

There was once a young Shepherd Boy who tended his sheep at the foot of
a mountain near a dark forest. It was rather lonely for him all day, so
he thought upon a plan by which he could get a little company and some
excitement. He rushed down towards the village calling out “Wolf,
Wolf,” and the villagers came out to meet him, and some of them stopped
with him for a considerable time. This pleased the boy so much that a
few days afterwards he tried the same trick, and again the villagers
came to his help. But shortly after this a Wolf actually did come out
from the forest, and began to worry the sheep, and the boy of course
cried out “Wolf, Wolf,” still louder than before. But this time the
villagers, who had been fooled twice before, thought the boy was again
deceiving them, and nobody stirred to come to his help. So the Wolf
made a good meal off the boy’s flock, and when the boy complained, the
wise man of the village said:

“A liar will not be believed, even when he speaks the truth.”

The Young Thief and His Mother

A young Man had been caught in a daring act of theft and had been
condemned to be executed for it. He expressed his desire to see his
Mother, and to speak with her before he was led to execution, and of
course this was granted. When his Mother came to him he said: “I want
to whisper to you,” and when she brought her ear near him, he nearly
bit it off. All the bystanders were horrified, and asked him what he
could mean by such brutal and inhuman conduct. “It is to punish her,”
he said. “When I was young I began with stealing little things, and
brought them home to Mother. Instead of rebuking and punishing me, she
laughed and said: “It will not be noticed.” It is because of her that I
am here to-day.”

“He is right, woman,” said the Priest; “the Lord hath said:

“Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will
not depart therefrom.”

The Man and His Two Wives

In the old days, when men were allowed to have many wives, a
middle-aged Man had one wife that was old and one that was young; each
loved him very much, and desired to see him like herself. Now the Man’s
hair was turning grey, which the young Wife did not like, as it made
him look too old for her husband. So every night she used to comb his
hair and pick out the white ones. But the elder Wife saw her husband
growing grey with great pleasure, for she did not like to be mistaken
for his mother. So every morning she used to arrange his hair and pick
out as many of the black ones as she could. The consequence was the Man
soon found himself entirely bald.

Yield to all and you will soon have nothing to yield.