The Fables of Aesop

SELECTED, TOLD ANEW
AND
THEIR HISTORY TRACED

By
JOSEPH JACOBS

DONE INTO PICTURES
BY
RICHARD HEIGHWAY

LONDON
MACMILLAN & CO.
& NEW YORK
1894
_All rights reserved_

To
PROF. F.J. CHILD
OF HARVARD

Contents

 PREFACE
 A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ÆSOPIC FABLE
 The Cock and the Pearl
 The Wolf and the Lamb
 The Dog and the Shadow
 The Lion’s Share
 The Wolf and the Crane
 The Man and the Serpent
 The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse
 The Fox and the Crow
 The Sick Lion
 The Ass and the Lapdog
 The Lion and the Mouse
 The Swallow and the Other Birds
 The Frogs Desiring a King
 The Mountains in Labour
 The Hares and the Frogs
 The Wolf and the Kid
 The Woodman and the Serpent
 The Bald Man and the Fly
 The Fox and the Stork
 The Fox and the Mask
 The Jay and the Peacock
 The Frog and the Ox
 Androcles
 The Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts
 The Hart and the Hunter
 The Serpent and the File
 The Man and the Wood
 The Dog and the Wolf
 The Belly and the Members
 The Hart in the Ox-Stall
 The Fox and the Grapes
 The Horse, Hunter, and Stag
 The Peacock and Juno
 The Fox and the Lion
 The Lion and the Statue
 The Ant and the Grasshopper
 The Tree and the Reed
 The Fox and the Cat
 The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing
 The Dog in the Manger
 The Man and the Wooden God
 The Fisher
 The Shepherd’s Boy
 The Young Thief and His Mother
 The Man and His Two Wives
 The Nurse and the Wolf
 The Tortoise and the Birds
 The Two Crabs
 The Ass in the Lion’s Skin
 The Two Fellows and the Bear
 The Two Pots
 The Four Oxen and the Lion
 The Fisher and the Little Fish
 Avaricious and Envious
 The Crow and the Pitcher
 The Man and the Satyr
 The Goose With the Golden Eggs
 The Labourer and the Nightingale
 The Fox, the Cock, and the Dog
 The Wind and the Sun
 Hercules and the Waggoner
 The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey
 The Miser and His Gold
 The Fox and the Mosquitoes
 The Fox Without a Tail
 The One-Eyed Doe
 Belling the Cat
 The Hare and the Tortoise
 The Old Man and Death
 The Hare With Many Friends
 The Lion in Love
 The Bundle of Sticks
 The Lion, the Fox, and the Beasts
 The Ass’s Brains
 The Eagle and the Arrow
 The Milkmaid and Her Pail
 The Cat-Maiden
 The Horse and the Ass
 The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner
 The Buffoon and the Countryman
 The Old Woman and the Wine-Jar
 The Fox and the Goat

PREFACE

It is difficult to say what are and what are not the Fables of Æsop.
Almost all the fables that have appeared in the Western world have been
sheltered at one time or another under the shadow of that name. I could
at any rate enumerate at least seven hundred which have appeared in
English in various books entitled _Æsop’s Fables_. L’Estrange’s
collection alone contains over five hundred. In the struggle for
existence among all these a certain number stand out as being the most
effective and the most familiar. I have attempted to bring most of
these into the following pages.

There is no fixed text even for the nucleus collection contained in
this book. Æsop himself is so shadowy a figure that we might almost be
forgiven if we held, with regard to him, the heresy of Mistress
Elizabeth Prig. What we call his fables can in most cases be traced
back to the fables of other people, notably of Phædrus and Babrius. It
is usual to regard the Greek Prose Collections, passing under the name
of Æsop, as having greater claims to the eponymous title; but modern
research has shown that these are but medieval prosings of Babrius’s
verse. I have therefore felt at liberty to retell the fables in such a
way as would interest children, and have adopted from the various
versions that which seemed most suitable in each case, telling the
fable anew in my own way.

Much has been learnt during the present century about the history of
the various apologues that walk abroad under the name of “Æsop.” I have
attempted to bring these various lines of research together in the
somewhat elaborate introductory volume which I wrote to accompany my
edition of Caxton’s _Æsop_, published by Mr. Nutt in his _Bibliothèque
de Carabas_. I have placed in front of the present version of the
“Fables,” by kind permission of Mr. Nutt, the short abstract of my
researches in which I there summed up the results of that volume. I
must accompany it, here as there, by a warning to the reader, that for
a large proportion of the results thus reached I am myself responsible;
but I am happy to say that many of them have been accepted by the
experts in America, France, and Germany, who have done me the honour to
consider my researches. Here, in England, there does not seem to be
much interest in this class of work, and English scholars, for the most
part, are content to remain in ignorance of the methods and results of
literary history.

I have attached to the “Fables” in the obscurity of small print at the
end a series of notes, summing up what is known as to the _provenance_
of each fable. Here, again, I have tried to put in shorter and more
readable form the results of my researches in the volume to which I
have already referred. For more detailed information I must refer to
the forty closely-printed pages (vol. i. pp. 225-268) which contain the
bibliography of the Fables.

JOSEPH JACOBS.