The Hare and the Tortoise

The Hare was once boasting of his speed before the other animals. “I
have never yet been beaten,” said he, “when I put forth my full speed.
I challenge any one here to race with me.”

The Tortoise said quietly, “I accept your challenge.”

“That is a good joke,” said the Hare; “I could dance round you all the
way.”

“Keep your boasting till you’ve beaten,” answered the Tortoise. “Shall
we race?”

So a course was fixed and a start was made. The Hare darted almost out
of sight at once, but soon stopped and, to show his contempt for the
Tortoise, lay down to have a nap. The Tortoise plodded on and plodded
on, and when the Hare awoke from his nap, he saw the Tortoise just near
the winning-post and could not run up in time to save the race. Then
said the Tortoise:

“Plodding wins the race.”

The Old Man and Death

An old labourer, bent double with age and toil, was gathering sticks in
a forest. At last he grew so tired and hopeless that he threw down the
bundle of sticks, and cried out: “I cannot bear this life any longer.
Ah, I wish Death would only come and take me!”

As he spoke, Death, a grisly skeleton, appeared and said to him: “What
wouldst thou, Mortal? I heard thee call me.”

“Please, sir,” replied the woodcutter, “would you kindly help me to
lift this faggot of sticks on to my shoulder?”

We would often be sorry if our wishes were gratified.

The Hare With Many Friends

A Hare was very popular with the other beasts who all claimed to be her
friends. But one day she heard the hounds approaching and hoped to
escape them by the aid of her many Friends. So, she went to the horse,
and asked him to carry her away from the hounds on his back. But he
declined, stating that he had important work to do for his master. “He
felt sure,” he said, “that all her other friends would come to her
assistance.” She then applied to the bull, and hoped that he would
repel the hounds with his horns. The bull replied: “I am very sorry,
but I have an appointment with a lady; but I feel sure that our friend
the goat will do what you want.” The goat, however, feared that his
back might do her some harm if he took her upon it. The ram, he felt
sure, was the proper friend to apply to. So she went to the ram and
told him the case. The ram replied: “Another time, my dear friend. I do
not like to interfere on the present occasion, as hounds have been
known to eat sheep as well as hares.” The Hare then applied, as a last
hope, to the calf, who regretted that he was unable to help her, as he
did not like to take the responsibility upon himself, as so many older
persons than himself had declined the task. By this time the hounds
were quite near, and the Hare took to her heels and luckily escaped.

He that has many friends, has no friends.