The Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts

A great conflict was about to come off between the Birds and the
Beasts. When the two armies were collected together the Bat hesitated
which to join. The Birds that passed his perch said: “Come with us”;
but he said: “I am a Beast.” Later on, some Beasts who were passing
underneath him looked up and said: “Come with us”; but he said: “I am a
Bird.” Luckily at the last moment peace was made, and no battle took
place, so the Bat came to the Birds and wished to join in the
rejoicings, but they all turned against him and he had to fly away. He
then went to the Beasts, but soon had to beat a retreat, or else they
would have torn him to pieces. “Ah,” said the Bat, “I see now,

“He that is neither one thing nor the other has no friends.”

The Hart and the Hunter

The Hart was once drinking from a pool and admiring the noble figure he
made there. “Ah,” said he, “where can you see such noble horns as
these, with such antlers! I wish I had legs more worthy to bear such a
noble crown; it is a pity they are so slim and slight.” At that moment
a Hunter approached and sent an arrow whistling after him. Away bounded
the Hart, and soon, by the aid of his nimble legs, was nearly out of
sight of the Hunter; but not noticing where he was going, he passed
under some trees with branches growing low down in which his antlers
were caught, so that the Hunter had time to come up. “Alas! alas!”
cried the Hart:

“We often despise what is most useful to us.”

The Serpent and the File

A Serpent in the course of its wanderings came into an armourer’s shop.
As he glided over the floor he felt his skin pricked by a file lying
there. In a rage he turned round upon it and tried to dart his fangs
into it; but he could do no harm to heavy iron and had soon to give
over his wrath.

It is useless attacking the insensible.

The Man and the Wood

A Man came into a Wood one day with an axe in his hand, and begged all
the Trees to give him a small branch which he wanted for a particular
purpose. The Trees were good-natured and gave him one of their
branches. What did the Man do but fix it into the axe head, and soon
set to work cutting down tree after tree. Then the Trees saw how
foolish they had been in giving their enemy the means of destroying
themselves.

The Dog and the Wolf

A gaunt Wolf was almost dead with hunger when he happened to meet a
House-dog who was passing by. “Ah, Cousin,” said the Dog. “I knew how
it would be; your irregular life will soon be the ruin of you. Why do
you not work steadily as I do, and get your food regularly given to
you?”

“I would have no objection,” said the Wolf, “if I could only get a
place.”

“I will easily arrange that for you,” said the Dog; “come with me to my
master and you shall share my work.”

So the Wolf and the Dog went towards the town together. On the way
there the Wolf noticed that the hair on a certain part of the Dog’s
neck was very much worn away, so he asked him how that had come about.

“Oh, it is nothing,” said the Dog. “That is only the place where the
collar is put on at night to keep me chained up; it chafes a bit, but
one soon gets used to it.”

“Is that all?” said the Wolf. “Then good-bye to you, Master Dog.”

Better starve free than be a fat slave.