The Lion in Love

A Lion once fell in love with a beautiful maiden and proposed marriage
to her parents. The old people did not know what to say. They did not
like to give their daughter to the Lion, yet they did not wish to
enrage the King of Beasts. At last the father said: “We feel highly
honoured by your Majesty’s proposal, but you see our daughter is a
tender young thing, and we fear that in the vehemence of your affection
you might possibly do her some injury. Might I venture to suggest that
your Majesty should have your claws removed, and your teeth extracted,
then we would gladly consider your proposal again.” The Lion was so
much in love that he had his claws trimmed and his big teeth taken out.
But when he came again to the parents of the young girl they simply
laughed in his face, and bade him do his worst.

Love can tame the wildest.

The Bundle of Sticks

An old man on the point of death summoned his sons around him to give
them some parting advice. He ordered his servants to bring in a faggot
of sticks, and said to his eldest son: “Break it.” The son strained and
strained, but with all his efforts was unable to break the Bundle. The
other sons also tried, but none of them was successful. “Untie the
faggots,” said the father, “and each of you take a stick.” When they
had done so, he called out to them: “Now, break,” and each stick was
easily broken. “You see my meaning,” said their father.

Union gives strength.

The Lion, the Fox, and the Beasts

The Lion once gave out that he was sick unto death and summoned the
animals to come and hear his last Will and Testament. So the Goat came
to the Lion’s cave, and stopped there listening for a long time. Then a
Sheep went in, and before she came out a Calf came up to receive the
last wishes of the Lord of the Beasts. But soon the Lion seemed to
recover, and came to the mouth of his cave, and saw the Fox, who had
been waiting outside for some time. “Why do you not come to pay your
respects to me?” said the Lion to the Fox.

“I beg your Majesty’s pardon,” said the Fox, “but I noticed the track
of the animals that have already come to you; and while I see many
hoof-marks going in, I see none coming out. Till the animals that have
entered your cave come out again I prefer to remain in the open air.”

It is easier to get into the enemy’s toils than out again.

The Ass’s Brains

The Lion and the Fox went hunting together. The Lion, on the advice of
the Fox, sent a message to the Ass, proposing to make an alliance
between their two families. The Ass came to the place of meeting,
overjoyed at the prospect of a royal alliance. But when he came there
the Lion simply pounced on the Ass, and said to the Fox: “Here is our
dinner for to-day. Watch you here while I go and have a nap. Woe betide
you if you touch my prey.” The Lion went away and the Fox waited; but
finding that his master did not return, ventured to take out the brains
of the Ass and ate them up. When the Lion came back he soon noticed the
absence of the brains, and asked the Fox in a terrible voice: “What
have you done with the brains?”

“Brains, your Majesty! it had none, or it would never have fallen into
your trap.”

Wit has always an answer ready.