The Fox and the Cat

A Fox was boasting to a Cat of its clever devices for escaping its
enemies. “I have a whole bag of tricks,” he said, “which contains a
hundred ways of escaping my enemies.”

“I have only one,” said the Cat; “but I can generally manage with
that.” Just at that moment they heard the cry of a pack of hounds
coming towards them, and the Cat immediately scampered up a tree and
hid herself in the boughs. “This is my plan,” said the Cat. “What are
you going to do?” The Fox thought first of one way, then of another,
and while he was debating the hounds came nearer and nearer, and at
last the Fox in his confusion was caught up by the hounds and soon
killed by the huntsmen. Miss Puss, who had been looking on, said:

“Better one safe way than a hundred on which you cannot reckon.”

The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing

A Wolf found great difficulty in getting at the sheep owing to the
vigilance of the shepherd and his dogs. But one day it found the skin
of a sheep that had been flayed and thrown aside, so it put it on over
its own pelt and strolled down among the sheep. The Lamb that belonged
to the sheep, whose skin the Wolf was wearing, began to follow the Wolf
in the Sheep’s clothing; so, leading the Lamb a little apart, he soon
made a meal off her, and for some time he succeeded in deceiving the
sheep, and enjoying hearty meals.

Appearances are deceptive.

The Dog in the Manger

A Dog looking out for its afternoon nap jumped into the Manger of an Ox
and lay there cosily upon the straw. But soon the Ox, returning from
its afternoon work, came up to the Manger and wanted to eat some of the
straw. The Dog in a rage, being awakened from its slumber, stood up and
barked at the Ox, and whenever it came near attempted to bite it. At
last the Ox had to give up the hope of getting at the straw, and went
away muttering:

“Ah, people often grudge others what they cannot enjoy themselves.”

The Man and the Wooden God

In the old days men used to worship sticks and stones and idols, and
prayed to them to give them luck. It happened that a Man had often
prayed to a wooden idol he had received from his father, but his luck
never seemed to change. He prayed and he prayed, but still he remained
as unlucky as ever. One day in the greatest rage he went to the Wooden
God, and with one blow swept it down from its pedestal. The idol broke
in two, and what did he see? An immense number of coins flying all over
the place.

The Fisher

A Fisher once took his bagpipes to the bank of a river, and played upon
them with the hope of making the fish rise; but never a one put his
nose out of the water. So he cast his net into the river and soon drew
it forth filled with fish. Then he took his bagpipes again, and, as he
played, the fish leapt up in the net. “Ah, you dance now when I play,”
said he.

“Yes,” said an old Fish:

“When you are in a man’s power you must do as he bids you.”