The Wind and the Sun

The Wind and the Sun were disputing which was the stronger. Suddenly
they saw a traveller coming down the road, and the Sun said: “I see a
way to decide our dispute. Whichever of us can cause that traveller to
take off his cloak shall be regarded as the stronger. You begin.” So
the Sun retired behind a cloud, and the Wind began to blow as hard as
it could upon the traveller. But the harder he blew the more closely
did the traveller wrap his cloak round him, till at last the Wind had
to give up in despair. Then the Sun came out and shone in all his glory
upon the traveller, who soon found it too hot to walk with his cloak
on.

Kindness effects more than severity.

Hercules and the Waggoner

A Waggoner was once driving a heavy load along a very muddy way. At
last he came to a part of the road where the wheels sank half-way into
the mire, and the more the horses pulled, the deeper sank the wheels.
So the Waggoner threw down his whip, and knelt down and prayed to
Hercules the Strong. “O Hercules, help me in this my hour of distress,”
quoth he. But Hercules appeared to him, and said:

“Tut, man, don’t sprawl there. Get up and put your shoulder to the
wheel.”

The gods help them that help themselves.

The Miser and His Gold

Once upon a time there was a Miser who used to hide his gold at the
foot of a tree in his garden; but every week he used to go and dig it
up and gloat over his gains. A robber, who had noticed this, went and
dug up the gold and decamped with it. When the Miser next came to gloat
over his treasures, he found nothing but the empty hole. He tore his
hair, and raised such an outcry that all the neighbours came around
him, and he told them how he used to come and visit his gold. “Did you
ever take any of it out?” asked one of them.

“Nay,” said he, “I only came to look at it.”

“Then come again and look at the hole,” said a neighbour; “it will do
you just as much good.”

Wealth unused might as well not exist.

The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey

A Man and his son were once going with their Donkey to market. As they
were walking along by its side a countryman passed them and said: “You
fools, what is a Donkey for but to ride upon?”

So the Man put the Boy on the Donkey and they went on their way. But
soon they passed a group of men, one of whom said: “See that lazy
youngster, he lets his father walk while he rides.”

So the Man ordered his Boy to get off, and got on himself. But they
hadn’t gone far when they passed two women, one of whom said to the
other: “Shame on that lazy lout to let his poor little son trudge
along.”

Well, the Man didn’t know what to do, but at last he took his Boy up
before him on the Donkey. By this time they had come to the town, and
the passers-by began to jeer and point at them. The Man stopped and
asked what they were scoffing at. The men said: “Aren’t you ashamed of
yourself for overloading that poor donkey of yours and your hulking
son?”

The Man and Boy got off and tried to think what to do. They thought and
they thought, till at last they cut down a pole, tied the donkey’s feet
to it, and raised the pole and the donkey to their shoulders. They went
along amid the laughter of all who met them till they came to Market
Bridge, when the Donkey, getting one of his feet loose, kicked out and
caused the Boy to drop his end of the pole. In the struggle the Donkey
fell over the bridge, and his fore-feet being tied together he was
drowned.

“That will teach you,” said an old man who had followed them:

“Please all, and you will please none.”