Chapter VI

Conclusion                                                     247

    Political status of Sulu at the time of Spanish
    evacuation                                                 247
    Spanish policy                                             249
        Attitude of the Moros                                  249
        Mistakes and difficulties of Spanish rule              251
        Report of Baltasar Giraudier                           254
        Views of Espina                                        255
        Purpose of Spain                                       256
        Resources of Spain                                     260


Appendixes

    Appendix I. The pacification of Mindanao by Ronquillo      269
            II. The pacification of Mindanao                   275
           III. The Moro raids of 1599 and 1600                279
            IV. Gallinato's expedition to Jolo                 283
             V. Olaso's expedition in 1629                     289
            VI. Corcuera's campaign in Jolo                    291
           VII. Obando's report on the preparations to be
                undertaken to return Alimud Din to Sulu        305
          VIII. Obando's report on the circumstances
                attending the attempt to return Alimud
                Din to Sulu                                    307
            IX. Report on the occupation of Palawan and
                Balabak                                        313
             X. A brief report on the expedition to take
                possession of Palawan                          317
            XI. The letter of the King of Spain to Sultan
                Israel                                         319
           XII. Letter from the captain-general of the
                Philippines forwarding a copy of the treaty
                of peace, protection, and commerce with Sulu   321
          XIII. Royal directions relative to commerce with
                Sulu, and the advisability of making
                Zamboanga a free port                          325
           XIV. Camba's report on the circumstances
                attending the treaty of 1836 and its bases     333
            XV. Camba's report on commerce with Sulu and
                the advisability of making Zamboanga a free
                port                                           339
           XVI. Communication from the governor of Zamboanga
                to the supreme government of the Philippines,
                relative to the treaty of Sir James Brooke
                with the Sultan of Sulu                        345
          XVII. Communication from the supreme government of
                the Philippines to the secretary of state,
                relative to the treaty of Sir James Brooke
                with the Sultan of Sulu                        355
         XVIII. Regulations relative to taxes and imposts
                on natives and immigrants in Sulu              359
           XIX. The protocol of Sulu, of 1877, between
                Spain, Germany, and Great Britain              367
            XX. The protocol of Sulu of 1885, between Spain,
                Germany, and Great Britain                     371
           XXI. Decree of the general government in regard
                to payment of tribute by Sulus                 375
          XXII. Royal communications relative to the rights
                of foreigners to the pearl fisheries of Sulu   377
         XXIII. Royal directions relative to the treatment
                of foreigners engaged in pearl fishing in
                the Sulu waters                                383
          XXIV. La Torre's views on the policy that should
                be adopted in Mindanao and Sulu                385


Maps and Diagrams

    Map I. The Sulu Archipelago                      Frontispiece
                                                    Facing page--
       II. Sulu Island                                        128
      III. Sketch of Jolo before 1888                         134
       IV. Sketch of Jolo at the present time                 134
    Diagram 1. Sultans and royal datus of Sulu                158
            2. Datus of Sulu not descended from Abu Bakr      158


PREFACE


The first object sought in the search for the Genealogy of Sulu was
a knowledge of those significant historical events of Sulu which
antedated the Spanish discovery and conquest of the Philippine
Islands, the connection which those events might have had with the
earlier history of the other islands and the light that they might
throw upon the subject of prehistoric Malayan immigration to the
Archipelago. The tarsila (genealogies) [1] of Mindanao show that
events of considerable importance had occurred in the Archipelago,
especially in the south, long before the Portuguese or the Spaniards
reached Malaysia. Some tribes, such as the Samals, we were told, had
emigrated from western Malaysia to the Sulu Archipelago and Mindanao,
and indications were not wanting that probably other tribes, now
inhabiting the Philippine Islands, came from the same place. Further,
information was desired relative to the mohammedanization of Sulu and
the possible connection that such a movement might have had with the
introduction of Islam into Sumatra and Malacca.

The research so conducted was well rewarded. The history of Sulu
was traced as far back as the early days of its oldest settlements,
and the organization of the nation was followed back to the primitive
communities out of which the Sulu nation has grown. Records of early
Malayan expeditions and of communication between Sulu and Mindanao
were traced to the earliest missionaries who reached these Islands
by the way of Malacca, and through whom the sultanates of Mindanao
and Sulu were organized on plans similar to those of Malacca and
Palembang. A fuller account of the life history and work of these
missionaries will be given in a later paper of this series. We here
give only a narrative of the events in which they participated and
the part they played in making the history of Sulu proper.

Many difficulties were encountered in the effort to secure an authentic
copy of the Genealogy of Sulu. Several trips of 20 to 40 miles were
made in small Moro sailing craft to visit datus who were said to have
copies of this document. The Sulu authorities who had the manuscript
or copies of it denied this fact from time to time, but after two
years and a half of persistent endeavor and inquiry, the original
manuscript was procured from the prime minister of the Sultan of Sulu,
whose confidence was gained by a long period of intimate acquaintance
and frequent communication. Soon after that, the Annals of Sulu (the
Luntar) were obtained from the sultan and some facts of importance were
learned and made use of in the course of this work. Diligent effort was
further made to collect all interesting Sulu traditions and documents,
and most of the best informed Sulus living were interviewed. Of these
the author feels under special obligation to mention Sheikh Mustafa
bin Ahmad, formerly prime minister to Sultan Harun; Hadji Butu, prime
minister of the present Sultan of Sulu; Datu Pangiran; and Hadji
Mohammed Tayib, one of the principal advisers of the present sultan.

After the first object sought had been gained, it became apparent
that a general public interest in Sulu and Mindanao had been growing
rapidly. It therefore seemed advisable to complete the history of
Sulu up to the date of Spanish evacuation, for no such work has as
yet been published in the English language. It is of special interest
to Americans living in Mindanao and Sulu and of general interest to
Americans and others elsewhere to have a better understanding of the
Moros in general and to acquire some idea of the history of Islam
in the Philippine Islands. This the history of Sulu makes possible
for the reader in a most vivid and realistic manner. The history is
written without prejudice or bias, and events are related as they
appear in the light of facts, and by one capable of seeing things
from the standpoint of a Sulu as well as of a Spaniard.

Nothing reveals the true character of a nation, its capabilities,
tendencies, and resources, better than its history. There is no time
when such general intimate knowledge of a people is more interesting
and more needed than during the period of their regeneration, and
there can be no time when the history of the Sulus will be more
interesting than at present.

Besides the Moro sources above referred to, several authors in Spanish
and English have been consulted and quoted with due credit. Special
indebtedness must however be expressed to Col. Miguel S. Espina,
author of "Apuntes sobre Jolo," whose admirable work has been our
chief authority for the majority of the events which occurred after
the Spanish invasion of Sulu in 1578. Espina saw considerable service
in Sulu, was intimately acquainted with the Spanish administration of
Sulu affairs, and most of his information was derived from official
documents and other sources of equal authenticity. Most of the events
relating to the late period of Spanish occupation of Sulu have been
confirmed by personal investigation, and the Sulu view of every matter
of significance has been studied and understood.

A chapter on the geography of the Archipelago is presented first to
give a general idea of the geographical relations of the Archipelago
of Sulu, the location of its various islands and settlements, and its
commercial resources. Special attention has been given to accurate
spelling of names and the correct location of settlements and small
islands. Unusual pains have been taken to get satisfactory maps of the
Archipelago and Island of Sulu and sketches of the town of Jolo. These
will help the reader and add interest to the succeeding chapters.

In the Appendixes will be seen reprints of various documents, reports,
quotations and letters of direct and significant bearing on the history
of Sulu and Mindanao. They are arranged in chronological order and
are intended to complete the record and description of important
events in Moro history so as to throw light on the actual conditions
of life among the Moros, the political motives of the interested
powers, and the real state of affairs in Mindanao at the time of the
Spanish evacuation. The source from which each article is derived is
given in connection therewith. A considerable number of quotations or
chapters have been taken from "The Philippine Islands," by Blair and
Robertson, for which special obligation is hereby expressed. Many of
the official documents given could not be conveniently incorporated
in the text of the history proper, and are herein published, probably
for the first time. They include protocols, capitulations, official
letters, decrees, and correspondence relative to Sulu obtained from
the Division of Archives of the Philippine Islands. The originals of
the copies can be seen in Spain in the Indies Archives.

Some liberty has been taken in correcting the spelling of geographical
and other proper names in order to render the history uniform in
its orthography and to avoid confusion and misconnection of events,
persons, and places. The same system of orthography has been used here
as that used and described in Part 1 of Volume IV, Ethnological Survey
Publications. Diacritical signs to denote the long sounds of vowels
have, however, been very rarely used. The Arabic "hamzat," occurring
in Moro words has been expressed by an apostrophe; while an inverted
apostrophe has been used to represent the Arabic sound or character
"`ain," the eighteenth letter of the Arabic alphabet. Annotations
which occur in the original documents have generally been indicated
by letters, while those made by the author are denoted by figures.


Manila, January, 1907.