CHAPTER V.

SULU UNDER SPANISH SOVEREIGNTY


OCCUPATION OF JOLO

The Sulu sultanate remained practically independent for four hundred
and twenty-five years. Its decline was not caused by national
retrogression or political dissension, but by the hostility
and aggression of its adversary. Sulu's power arose through the
introduction of firearms into eastern Malaysia and began to decline
at the introduction of steam war vessels into the Philippine
Archipelago. The mobility and speed of steam war vessels put to
disadvantage all Moro sailing and rowing craft. Pirates were chased on
the sea and hunted in their lairs. The fear which steamboats struck in
the hearts of Moros made them run away from their homes and settlements
and hide in the jungles whenever they heard the whistle of a steamboat,
or saw it approaching from a distance. The steamboats purchased by
Governor Claveria in 1848, which crushed the power of the Balangingi
Samals, were referred to by Captain Keppel in the following words:


    "On the 14th of January [1849] we left Zamboanga, getting under
    weigh in company with such a fleet of gunboats as would have done
    credit to any nation."


The vessels purchased in 1861 increased the efficiency of the navy to
such a degree as to make it possible to carry war into Sulu territory,
attack many remote islands and settlements and blockade the port
of Jolo so effectively as to check the importation of firearms and
ammunition, and restore a condition of safety and peace on the sea.

The campaign of 1876 was a very significant event in the history
of Sulu. It decided the fate of this state and definitely fixed
its relation to the Philippine Archipelago. Spain's determination
to conquer Sulu never waned and seemed stronger then than ever
before. The Governor-General was a man of great ability and aspired
to the highest military honors. Moro raids recurred occasionally and
the strained relations of the two states became so tense that rupture
was inevitable.

In reviewing the history of Spanish campaigns in Sulu up to this
time, one is strongly impressed with the futility of conquest without
occupation. To invade a Moro settlement, defeat its forces, burn its
houses, kill some of its inhabitants, and carry some away as prisoners,
is not very different in character and effect from a Moro raid. Such
methods incited the Moros to revenge themselves by waging war on their
invaders. This they did by raiding, which is their established method
of warfare. Up to this time natural advantages remained on the side of
the Sulus and Spanish forces could accomplish no permanent results,
in spite of their superior methods of warfare and excellent military
organization.

Since the days of the great Corcuera, no Spanish general appears
to have recognized the importance of the occupation of Sulu as an
essential factor in its pacification. Their apparent inability to
comprehend the real solution of this question might have arisen from
consciousness of their inability to provide an adequate force for the
purpose. However that may have been, the honor of such an achievement
remained for Governor-General Malcampo, who carried it out with credit
to himself and to the government which he represented. With a clear
understanding of the task to be accomplished, he resolved to conquer
Sulu and occupy it, and then suppress piracy by striking the pirates at
home. He left Manila on the 5th of February, 1876, with a large force
composed of one battalion of the peninsular regiment of artillery, one
company of mountain artillery, five regiments of infantry, ordnance,
engineers, sanitary and prison detachments, and two companies of the
Guardia Civil. [217] At Zamboanga, the expedition was reinforced by
864 volunteers, 400 of whom were from Zamboanga and 464 from Kagayan
de Misamis commanded by the Augustinian friar, Ramon Zueco.

The whole expedition, estimated at 9,000 troops, left Zamboanga on
the 20th of February. They were conveyed in 10 steamboats and 11
transports, and were escorted by a fleet of 12 gunboats under the
admiral in command of the Philippine naval forces. The Island of
Sulu was reached on the 21st, and next morning a force disembarked
at Patikul, 4 miles east of Jolo. The Moros at this place offered
some resistance and caused some casualties, but later in the
day abandoned the place and fled. Here a considerable column was
detached to reconnoitre the interior and advance on Jolo from the land
side. This plan proved impracticable and the column suffered severely
from heat and thirst and returned next day to the beach at Tandu, 2
miles east of Jolo. On the 29th, a general advance was made on Jolo
by land and sea. The fleet opened fire on the town, while the land
forces rushed the forts and trenches on the sides. The main force
was directed against the fort of Daniel, which was captured after a
sharp fight. The Moros in the other forts made a fiercer resistance,
but were soon overcome by the fire of the Spanish artillery and the
whole town was taken by assault. On the 30th, the fort of Panglima
Adak, situated at the base of the hills, was taken. Not content
with this brilliant victory and intent upon striking a decisive and
deadly blow, Malcampo directed various expeditions against the other
strongholds of Sulu. A force of marines and volunteers destroyed 80
boats and burned 90 houses on Tapul. On March 16 an expedition to
Lapak destroyed its forts and reduced the settlement to ashes. On
March 22 the forts of Parang were reduced, the settlement was burned,
and many Sulus killed. On the 24th Maymbung was similarly destroyed.

A large garrison was established at Jolo, consisting of two regiments
of infantry, one company of artillery, one company of engineers,
and two companies of disciplinarios. [218] Capt. Pascual Cervera, a
captain of frigate of the navy was given command of the garrison, under
the title of politico-military governor of Sulu. General Malcampo was
given the title of "Count of Jolo," while many decorations were awarded
to gallant officers, and a medal was struck for each participant in
the campaign.

The step thus taken by the Philippine Government appears to have
been well planned and firmly resolved. No sooner was a footing
gained than measures were undertaken to quarter the troops and
fortify the place. Barracks were constructed on favorable spots on
the edge of the swamps, and the forts Alfonso XII and the Princess
of Asturias were erected on the site of Daniel's and Panglima Adak's
kuta, respectively. Plans were further laid out at this early time
for the building of a town and the founding of a colony. Governor
Cervera, to whom this task was first entrusted, was a vigorous,
prudent, and circumspect chief. He prosecuted the work with energy
and kept a vigilant watch on the movements of the enemy. He began
the construction of a military hospital and established the office
of captain of the port. Small expeditions were made to Bwan, Mapaid,
Balimbing, and South Ubian for the chastisement of pirates who took
refuge there. The kuta of the first three of these settlements were
destroyed and their armaments were taken. This year saw considerable
sickness in the garrison of Jolo; a large number of patients were
removed to Zamboanga and 318 to Cebu.

On October 1, Governor Cervera was temporarily relieved as governor
of Sulu by Col. Eduardo Fernandez Bremon, and on December 31, 1876,
Brig. Gen. José Paulin assumed permanent command of the garrison
as the second governor of Sulu. The latter continued the peace
negotiations which were commenced by Governor Cervera and expended
a good deal of energy in trying to conciliate some datus and their
followers. His measures were, however, resented by the Sulus and
hostilities increased. He left Jolo April 30, 1877, and the command
was temporarily held by Lieut. Lopez Nuño and José Marina, for three
months and one month and a half, respectively.


RULE OF SULTAN JAMALUL A'LAM

After the fall of Jolo and its destruction by General Malcampo,
Sultan Jamalul A'lam removed to Bud Datu and later to Likup. The datus
dispersed in all directions, but Datus Asibi and Pula, the strongest
chiefs after the sultan, remained in the neighborhood of Jolo, at
Tandu and Patikul. The Sulus were united at that time and formed one
party, which was faithful and loyal to the sultan. They regarded the
establishment of a Spanish garrison at Jolo as an intrusion upon their
soil and an intolerable humiliation and offense. The common people
resented the invasion as bitterly as the datus. A few years before
they regarded themselves the lords of the southern seas. The Bisayan
and the Kalamian Islands, Paláwan, and eastern Borneo were their
hunting grounds. They sailed proudly on the seas and had the dignity of
masters of innumerable vassals and slaves. But now like fierce tigers
driven back to their dens or packs of hungry wolves chased to their
haunts, they waited for no word of command or organized resistance,
but hurled themselves recklessly at the Spanish soldiers wherever
they encountered them. Individuals and small parties lost no chance of
firing a rifle from behind the bushes or throwing a lance from across
the ditches. Venders in the market who saw a chance to strike a blow at
the soldiers, could not resist the temptation, but recklessly darted
at the enemy with a kris or barong [219] brandished in hand. A vender
from Lu'uk who did not have a barong of his own snatched one from a
neighbor and rushed at the guard. The soldiers were attacked in the
forest while cutting lumber or firewood, at the river while getting
drinking water and at the beach while bathing. Juramentados [220]
crept on the sentinels in the dark and from ditches and the beach
and inflicted considerable loss and damage. Some desperate characters
entered the trenches and fought the soldiers on guard, while others
slipped into the barracks and caught soldiers and officers off their
guard and threw torches on the roofs of the warehouses.

Jamalul A'lam discouraged all overtures for peace, and for more
than two years could not be reconciled to the new conditions and
political status. Early in 1877 he encouraged hostilities of all
sorts. Juramentados and small attacking parties harassed the garrison
frequently. On the 25th of February a force of more than 2,000 Sulus
advanced against the garrison, but were easily repulsed. Small
parties surprised pickets and attacked laborers. On the 9th of
September about 800 Sulus charged the town from the land side and
from the sea and 300 attacked Fort Asturias. They were repulsed in
the afternoon, but resumed the attack at night and retreated with
great loss. Another general fight occurred on the 11th, but the Moros
were again overpowered and driven back. Undaunted by these failures,
the Sultan called a council of the datus and planned for another
attack in the future. The juramentados became more treacherous and
intrepid. They hid their barongs inside their trousers and in bundles
they pretended to be taking to the market and attacked the guard
unawares and after admission into the plaza. This state of affairs
continued until June, 1878.


CESSION OF POSSESSIONS IN BORNEO TO BRITISH NORTH BORNEO COMPANY

In January, 1878, Sultan Jamalul A`lam ceded the Sulu possessions
in Borneo to the Sabah or British North Borneo Company. He granted
the authorized representative of this company, Baron von Overbeck,
absolute ownership and dominion over that large territory for a
money consideration of $5,000, Mexican currency, per annum. The
Sabah Company was preceded in 1865 by an American company started
by Mr. Torrey on the Kimanis River. The concessions of the American
company were obtained from the Sultan of Bruney; but this enterprise
proved a financial failure and its rights were bought by the Austrian
Baron von Overbeck and the English merchant Mr. Alfred Dent.

"In spite of the opposition of Spain, which claimed that the Sultan of
Sulu being a Spanish vassal could not dispose of his territory without
her consent, the English company organized by Mr. Dent succeeded in
obtaining a charter of incorporation under Act of Parliament, 1st
November, 1881, as the 'British North Borneo Company' with right to
acquire other interests in, over, or affecting the territories or
property comprised in the several grants." Baron von Overbeck and
Mr. Dent obtained from the Sultans of Bruney and Sulu a series of
charters conferring on them sovereign authority in North Borneo under
the titles of Maharaja of Sabah, Raja of Gaya, Raja of Sandakan, and
Datu Bandahara. The territory governed by the British North Borneo
Company has a coast line of over 600 miles and an area of more than
30,000 square miles. The form and text of the commission granted by
Sultan Jamalul A`lam appointing Baron von Overbeck Datu Bandahara and
Raja of Sandakan is herein quoted as given in the annual report of
Gen. George W. Davis, commanding the Department of Mindanao, under
date of August 1, 1902:


    "To all nations on the face of the earth whom these matters may
    concern: We, Mahasari Padukka Mawlana as-Sultan Mohammed Jamalul
    A`lam bin al-Marhum Mahasari Padukka as-Sultan Mohammed Pulalun,
    Sultan of Sulu and its dependencies, send greeting:


"Whereas, we have seen fit to grant unto our trusty and well-beloved
friends, Gustavus Baron von Overbeck and Alfred Dent, esquire,
certain portions of the dominions owned by us, comprising all the
lands on the north and east coast of the Island of Borneo, from the
Pandasan River on the northwest to the Sibuco River on the east coast,
including amongst others the states of Paitan, Sugut, Bangaya, Labuk,
Sandakan, Kina Batangan, and Mumiang and all the lands and territories
in Darvel Bay as far as the Sibuco River, together with all the lands
belonging thereto, for certain considerations between us agreed, and,

"Whereas, the said Baron von Overbeck is the chief and only authorized
representative of his company in Borneo:

"Now, therefore, know ye that we, Mahasari Padukka Mawlana as-Sultan
Mohammed Jamalul A`lam bin al-Marhum Mahasari Padukka as-Sultan
Pulalun, Sultan of Sulu and its dependencies, have nominated and
appointed and do hereby nominate and appoint the said Baron von
Overbeck supreme and independent ruler of the above-named territories,
with the title of Datu Bandahara and Raja of Sandakan, with absolute
power over life and death of the inhabitants of the country, with all
the absolute rights of property over the soil of the country vested
in us and the right to dispose of the same as well as the rights
over the productions of the country, whether mineral, vegetable,
or animal, with the rights of making laws, coining money, creating
an army and navy, levying customs dues on home and foreign trade,
and shipping and other dues and taxes on the inhabitants as to him
may seem good or expedient, together with all other powers and rights
usually exercised by and belonging to sovereign rulers, and which we
hereby delegate to him of our own free and sovereign will.

"And we call upon all foreign nations with whom we have formed friendly
treaties or alliances, and we command all the datus, nobles, governors,
chiefs, and people owing allegiance to us in the said territories
to receive and acknowledge the said Datu Bandahara as the supreme
ruler over the said states and to obey his commands and respect his
authority therein as our own. And in case of the death or retirement
from office of the said Datu Bandahara then his duly appointed
successor in the office of supreme ruler and governor-in-chief of the
company's territories in Borneo shall likewise, if appointed thereto
by the company, succeed to the title of Datu Bandahara and Raja of
Sandakan, and all the powers enumerated above be vested in him.

"Done at the palace of the Sultan, at Likup, in the Island of Sulu, on
the nineteenth of Muharam, A. H. 1295, being the 22nd day of January,
A. D. 1878."


TREATY OF JULY, 1878

Col. Carlos Martinez became Governor of Sulu on the 28th of September,
1877. This distinguished commander applied himself to his work with
unusual enthusiasm and assiduity, and by tact and sagacity succeeded in
restoring order and peace, in the form of a treaty signed by him and
by Sultan Jamalul A`lam in July, 1878. Great credit for the success
of the negotiations belongs to Datu Harun ar-Rashid, who spared no
effort to convince the Sultan that peace and loyalty to Spain were
preferable to a condition of continued hostility, which meant ruin
to the state of Sulu. The treaty laid stress on the submission of
Sulu to Spanish sovereignty, and the terms of the Sulu text expressed
the same fairly well and without evasion. This being the last treaty
entered into by both states, it may be considered to define the final
relation that existed between them and the exact position which Sulu
occupied in the Philippine Archipelago during the last period of the
Spanish régime. The best account of this relation is given in the
words of the treaty itself, careful translations of which have been
prepared from both the Spanish and Sulu texts and are herein added
for full information:


TRANSLATION OF THE SPANISH COPY OF THE TREATY

    Decree

    Office of the Governor-General of the Philippines,

    Manila, August 19, 1878.

    The Supreme Government having approved the bases of pacification
    and capitulation which are submitted through me to his Majesty,
    the King, by the Sultan of Sulu and the Datus of Sulu, and the act
    to that effect, which I confirmed and ratified on the 15th instant,
    having been drafted and signed by the commission appointed for that
    purpose by me in representation of my authority, and the Sultan and
    Datus, in representation of the sultanate of Sulu, I hereby direct
    that a copy of said act be published in the Official Gazette of
    Manila, in order that said bases be officially and publicly known.


    Moriones.


[Copy referred to.]


    An Act drafted on the bases of pacification and capitulation
    presented by the Sultan of Sulu and the Datus to His Majesty the
    King Alfonso XII, through His Excellency the Governor-General of
    the Philippine Islands, acknowledging the sovereignty of Spain
    over the territory of this sultanate.


In the town of Likup, Sulu, and in the palace of His Excellency the
Sultan of this Archipelago, on the 20th of July 1878, 23rd day of
the month Rajab, year of the Hegira 1295:

Present: Carlos Martinez y Romero, Colonel of Infantry and
Politico-Military Governor of Jolo, Francisco Fernandez de Alarcon y
García, Colonel of Marine Corps, Frigate Captain and Commander of the
Naval Station of Jolo, and interpreters, Alejo Alvarez y Villasis and
Pedro Ortuoste y García, these constituting a commission representing
His Excellency, the Governor-General of the Philippines:

Also present: Padukka Mahasari Mawlana, Sultan Mohammed Jamalul A`lam
and the Datus Padukka Raja Muda, Mohammed Badarud Din, the Padukka
Mohammed Zaynul `Abidin Raja Lawut, the Padukka Datu Mohammed Harun
ar-Rashid and the Datu Padukka Muluk Bandarasa, in the name and
representation of the Sultanate of Sulu;

The object of the meeting was to read and sign the articles of
pacification and capitulation presented by the Sultan and Datus to
the Governor-General on February 24th, of this year, and approved by
His Majesty Alfonso XII, on May 3rd last; the reading of the articles
being proceeded with as follows: Bases of pacification and capitulation
presented by the Sultan and Datus of Sulu, to his Majesty the King of
Spain Don Alfonso XII, through His Excellency the Governor-General of
the Philippines, acknowledging the sovereignty of the King of Spain
over the territory of the said sultanate.

Article 1. We declare that the sovereignty to Spain over all the
Archipelago of Sulu and its dependencies is indisputable, and as a
natural consequence of this declaration we constitute ourselves loyal
subjects of His Majesty King Alfonso XII, and of his successors to
the power.

Article 2. The Spanish Government shall give the Sultan a yearly salary
of 2,400 pesos, 700 to the heir of the sultanate Datu Badarud-Din
and 600 to each of the Datus Padukka Raja Lawut Zaynul `Abidin,
Padukka Datu Harun ar-Rashid, Padukka Datu Muluk Bandarasa Pula,
members of the Sultan's Council, to compensate them in some way for
the losses they have suffered.

Article 3. Spain has the right to occupy such points in the Sulu
Archipelago and its dependencies as may seem necessary to the Spanish
authorities, respecting towns, families and property; in case of
forcible appropriation for the public good, compensation shall be
paid according to appraisement; we beg that exception be made for the
land extending from Sinungan Point to the south coast of Kadungdung,
which we would use for our residences; it could be occupied by the
Government in case of war with a foreign power.

Article 4. The Sultan shall be empowered to collect duties from foreign
merchants and ships trading with places not occupied by the Government.

Article 5. The Sultan shall be allowed to communicate directly with
the Governor-General whenever he has a complaint to make against the
Governor, or the commander of war ships.

Article 6. The Sultan shall be authorized to issue licenses to carry
muzzle-loading firearms when requested by Sulus, after presenting
two honorably known witnesses who will guarantee their proper use
both on land and sea.

Article 7. The Sultan shall be allowed to issue passports to Sulu
craft; but when any of said craft has to leave the Sulu Archipelago,
the owners will first have to go before the Governor; the principal
datus and some other persons serving under commissions from the Sultan
are to be excepted from this formality; but the Sultan shall report
all such cases to the Governor.

Article 8. We will use all our efforts to cause pirates and malefactors
to desist from their evil inclinations; and, if we can not prevent
them, we will inform the Governor of Jolo for him to take the
necessary measures, whenever we know the whereabouts of said pirates
and malefactors; but we will not be held responsible if we have
no information concerning them; we furthermore agree to render all
assistance in our power in running down such pirates and malefactors.

Article 9. We shall be allowed the free exercise of our religion and
customs. Catholic missionaries will have liberty to visit and reside
in any place in Sulu, and its dependencies, and will give us notice
before going, so that in case of danger we may furnish an escort;
failure to give us notice will relieve us from all responsibility
for any mishap that may befall them. The same caution applies to any
European or Christian Indian native who may wish to visit the interior.

Article 10. We pledge ourselves to deliver to the Spaniards all
Christian delinquents and criminals, and all Moros in the same case
shall be returned to us.

Article 11. Sulu and its dependencies shall raise the Spanish flag
on vessels and in towns; however, if a boat does not fly said flag
it shall not be held at fault if it has a passport; at the place of
the Sultan's residence he shall fly the Spanish war flag.

Article 12. All the articles of the foregoing capitulation shall be
observed without alteration, except by mutual agreement.

Both commissions unanimously agreeing to the foregoing articles as
read, said articles being identical with those whose copies were in
the hands of the Governor and of the Sultan of Sulu, the latter and
the persons with them signed this document on the spot, place, day,
month and year aforesaid.

The Sultan of Sulu,--His rubric and stamp,--the Governor of Sulu,
Carlos Martinez,--Mohammed Harun ar-Rashid,--the Commander of the
Naval Station, Francisco Fernandez de Alarcon y García,--Mohammed
Zaynul `Abidin,--Mohammed Badarud Din,--Mohammed Pula,--interpreters,
Alejo Alvarez, Pedro Ortuoste.

I, Don Domingo Moriones y Murillo, Lieutenant-General of the National
Army, Marquis de Oroquieta, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal and
Military Order of San Hermenegildo, of the Royal and Distinguished
Order of Carlos III, of that of Military Merit, Red and White, and
many others for feats of arms, Governor and Captain-General of the
Philippine Islands, etc., etc., in the name of His Majesty the King
of Spain, Alfonso XII, whom God keep, do confirm and ratify the above
act of pacification and capitulation, in all its parts.

Manila, August 15, 1878.--Domingo Moriones.--True copy.--Tomas Aguirre
de Mena.


TRANSLATION OF THE SULU TEXT OF THE TREATY OF 1878

    This document is intended to confirm the treaty which was agreed
    upon by Padukka Mahasari Mawlana Sultan Mohammed Jamalul A`lam
    and all the datus and chiefs of Sulu. These statements which
    we make shall be sent to His Majesty, the King of Spain, Don
    Alfonso XII, through His Excellency the Governor-General of the
    Philippines. All the country that the Sultan rules shall obey
    the orders of the King of Spain.

    This in Likup, in the palace of Padukka Mahasari Mawlana Sultan
    Mohammed Jamalul A`lam, on Monday the 22nd of July, 1878 A. D.,
    or the 23rd of Rajab, 1295 A. H.

    There met the Politico-Military Governor of Sulu, Señor Don Carlos
    Martinez y Romero, Colonel of Infantry; and the Commander of the
    Naval Station of Sulu, Colonel of Marine Infantry and Frigate
    Captain, Señor Don Francisco Fernandez de Alarcon y García and
    Señor Captain Alejo Alvarez, and Señor Don Pedro Ortuoste y García,
    the representatives of His Excellency the Governor-General of
    the Philippines.

    Also present: Padukka Mahasari Mawlana Sultan Mohammed Jamalul
    A`lam of Sulu, and Padukka Datu Mohammed Badarud Din, and Padukka
    Datu Raja Lawut Mohammed Zaynul `Abidin, and Padukka Datu Muluk
    Bandarasa Mohammed Pula, and Padukka Datu Mohammed Harun ar-Rashid
    who are properly obeyed by all their subjects.

    The object of the meeting was to read, confirm, and sign
    the agreement presented by Padukka Mahasari Mawlana Sultan
    Mohammed Jamalul A`lam and all the datus, to His Excellency the
    Governor-General, on the 22nd day of Safar, 1295 A. H., or the
    24th of February, 1878 A. D., which was approved by His Majesty
    the King of Spain, Alfonso XII, on the 3rd day of May, of this
    year, or the 2nd of Jamadil-Awal.

    The following is the copy of the statements that were read:

    This is the treaty of Spain with the Sultan and Datus of Sulu
    which was sent to His Majesty the King of Spain, Don Alfonso XII,
    through His Excellency the Governor-General of the Philippines.

    Article I. All the people of Sulu and its Archipelago shall obey
    only the King of Spain, Alfonso XII, or whosoever shall succeed
    him. This being our wish, we will not change or turn away to any
    other nation.

    Article II. The Spanish Government shall pay the Sultan an annual
    salary of 2,400 pesos, Mexican currency, and Padukka Datu Raja
    Muda Mohammed Badarud Din 700 pesos. It shall also pay 600 pesos
    to each of the three following datus, namely: Padukka Datu Raja
    Lawut Mohammed Zaynul `Abidin, Padukka Datu Muluk Bandarasa
    Mohammed Pula, and Padukka Datu Mohammed Harun ar-Rashid; this
    is to compensate them for the losses they suffered.

    Article III. The Spanish Government may occupy any place it chooses
    along the northern coast of the island, from Sinungan to Bwal and
    as far as Kadungdung, but the southern coast of the island from
    Kadungdung to Sinungan shall be left for the Sultan; on condition,
    however, that it may be occupied by the Spanish Government in
    case of trouble with foreigners, at any future time. In case
    the plantations or fields of the people are appropriated for
    such occupation, they shall be compensated for. Houses, however,
    shall not be removed.

    Article IV. The Sultan shall have the right to collect duties
    from all foreign merchants and ships of whatever nationality they
    may be, in case they come to our ports; but we have no right to
    collect duties from them when they come to ports occupied by the
    Spanish Government.

    Article V. In case of disagreement between us and the governor
    of Sulu, or the commanders of war ships, the Sultan shall have
    the right to communicate with the Captain-General direct.

    Article VI. All the people of Sulu can, if they choose, use
    muzzle-loading rifles and lantaka. [221] They will, however, be
    required to present a certificate from two or three free people, of
    good reputation, to the effect that they (who use the firearms) are
    good and well-behaving people and that they do not use such arms
    for mischief. Under such conditions the Sultan may give a license.

    Article VII. The Sultan has the right to give passports to Sulus
    wishing to travel for commercial purposes to whatever place they
    may go, on condition that they pass by Jolo to inform the Spanish
    governor of their destination. In case those of noble birth or
    the datus do not stop at Jolo, the Sultan himself shall inform the
    Governor, for they, as a rule, have the former's consent to travel.

    Article VIII. We will try to suppress all pirates; but in case
    we are unable to do so we will notify the Governor of their
    location. But in case we do not know where they are, we can not
    be held responsible for such information. We will also aid the
    Government with as many men as we can afford to bring together,
    and we shall be pleased to give guides who can tell the hiding
    places of such pirates.

    Article IX. Our customs and usages, including our religion, shall
    not be changed. If there is any priest who desires to travel around
    in this country, he ought to inform the Sultan, so that he may send
    a companion with him; but in case he fails to ask permission and
    travels around without obeying this rule and is killed, the Sultan
    can not be held responsible for such results. The same condition
    shall govern in the case of all Spaniards and soldiers or any
    one else who may desire to live outside of the places agreed upon.

    Article X. We guarantee to deliver all Christians who run away on
    account of crime; so also must the Spaniards treat us Mohammedans
    in case our servants and people run away to them. It would not
    be right for the Spaniards to hold or protect them.

    Article XI. The Sulus and all the Sultan's subjects have the right
    to trade in small or large boats whether they use flags or not;
    this on condition that they have passes; but in case they like to
    use a flag they must use the Spanish flag. The Sultan shall not
    use a flag of his own, but that of the King of Spain. All other
    datus and chiefs of the islands, whenever they use any flag,
    must use the Spanish commercial flag.

    Article XII. The Spaniards and the Sultan shall fully observe
    the articles of this agreement which has to be ratified by the
    Spanish Government. We sincerely beg that, whenever there is any
    disagreement between us and the Spanish Governor concerning some
    crime, careful and proper investigation be made, without any
    undue haste to fight. We have full trust and confidence in the
    Spanish Government and expect that the Spanish Government will
    have similar trust in us.

    Article XIII. It shall not be right to alter the articles of this
    agreement without the mutual consent of both parties.

    Both parties having understood all the articles of this treaty
    do hereby confirm it all and certify to it. Said articles being
    identical with those which were presented by Padukka Mahasari
    Mawlana Sultan Mohammed Jamalul A'lam, signed by us in the palace
    in Likup, on the day mentioned above in this document.

    I, Don Domingo Moriones y Murillo, Lieutenant-General of the
    National Army, Marquis de Oroquieta, Knight Grand Cross of the
    Royal and Military Order of San Hermenegildo, of the Royal and
    Distinguished Order of Carlos III, of that of Military Merit,
    Red and White, and many others for feats of arms, Governor and
    Captain-General of the Philippine Islands, etc., etc., in the name
    of His Majesty the King of Spain, Alfonso XII, whom God keep, do
    confirm and ratify the above act of pacification and capitulation,
    in all its parts.


    Manila, August 15, 1878 A. D.

    (18, Sha'ban, 1295 A. H.)


The status of Sulu as defined by this treaty resembled that of a
protectorate rather than a dependency. The internal administration
of Sulu, its customs, laws, and religion were fully respected and
were not subject to Spanish jurisdiction, confirmation, approval, or
interference of any sort, except in matters pertaining to regulations
for the use of firearms.

The foreign political relations of Sulu were made subject to the
full control of the Philippine Government. This control (or sovereign
right) was the chief motive for the war and was declared by the treaty
indisputable. On the strength of this both England and Germany, in
1885, concluded a treaty with Spain recognizing her full sovereignty
over the whole Sulu Archipelago, including Balabak and Kagayan
Sulu. In that same treaty Spain relinquished all claims to that
part of northeastern Borneo formerly ruled by the Sultans of Sulu;
this being the territory administered by the British North Borneo
Company. The commercial relations of Sulu with foreign countries
were not submitted to Spanish supervision or control outside of the
territory occupied by the garrisons, and the sultan was empowered to
collect duties from foreign merchants and ships trading with Maymbung,
Siasi, and other places not occupied by the Philippine Government.

The treaty on the whole secured for Spain the fruits of her conquest
and established a stable condition of peace and safety throughout
the whole Archipelago and in the neighboring southern seas. Foreign
interference ceased, commerce revived, and trading routes were resumed
without danger or risk.

Governor Martinez had a brilliant term of service marked by important
results and excellent public improvements. He began the titanic
labor of filling the swamps and brought the town of Jolo to its
present level. He laid out its streets, plazas, parks, and trees,
finished the tower of the Queen (blockhouse No. 2), and constructed
the blockhouse of the playa at Tulay, the military hospital, the
light-house and various bridges. A great part of this work was done
by prison labor, 400 prisoners having been transferred from Manila
to Jolo for this purpose. His administration marked the beginning
of a period of prosperity to the colony and temporary peace with the
Sulus. He reëstablished friendly relations with the sultan and datus
and had success in many undertakings. Early in 1880 he fell sick and
to the regret of all parties left Jolo for Manila.

Governor Martinez was relieved by Col. Rafael Gonzalez de Rivera, the
fourth governor of Sulu, on February 3, 1880. Rivera followed in the
steps of Martinez, but circumstances changed as the sultan's health
declined, and the sultana's political intrigues divided the state into
two hostile parties. On March 30 the scouts at the tower of the Queen
were attacked by a band of Sulus, who killed 2 privates, and wounded 1
sergeant and 6 privates. However, the Sulus were repulsed, losing 12
men dead. The sultan, when called upon to punish the transgressors,
responded promptly, went to Lu'uk and chastised them severely. In
December of the same year Datu Pula reported some juramentados in the
suburbs, two of whom were encountered by the troops; one was killed
and the other fled.

After the treaty of 1878, Jamalul A'lam established his official
residence at Maymbung and acted in a dignified and creditable
manner. He observed the terms of the treaty faithfully until his
death. He was intelligent, vigorous, and willing to learn. He received
Spanish and native visitors with befitting courtesy and was well
respected and endeared himself to everybody who knew him. Following
the example of his father, he published a code of laws which is said
to have been milder than that of his predecessors. It is no doubt
a modification or a reproduction of the code used by Pulalun and
Jamalul Kiram I. It was in current use in the country at the time of
the Spanish evacuation in 1899.

Jamalul A'lam lived an honorable life and kept one wife only for the
greater part of the time. He repudiated the mother of his eldest son,
Badarud Din, and loved tenderly Pangian Inchi Jamila, the mother
of his second, Amirul Kiram. Inchi Jamila was not very beautiful,
but she was attractive, intelligent, active, and comparatively
young. She associated with her husband in the administration of
affairs and wielded considerable influence on the chiefs and council of
state. She was very generous and entertaining, and won the respect of
the majority of the datus. Wishing to secure the sultanate for her son,
Amirul Kiram, she attempted to alienate Badarud Din from his father
and used her influence on the council to that end. Intrigues followed
and the state divided into two factions, partisans of Amirul Kiram
and Pangian Inchi Jamila and partisans of Badarud Din, the rightful
heir. Jamalul A'lam managed affairs with a strong hand and kept all
parties united, but early in 1881 his health began to decline rapidly
and his favorite wife meddled all the more with the affairs of the
state. The knowledge of her schemes soon spread, and as it became
known that Jamalul A'lam was actually failing, disorder arose and a
condition bordering on anarchy prevailed. On the 22d of February armed
Sulus attempted to force the gates of Jolo, but they were repulsed
and most of them were killed. The sultan grew worse and disturbances
increased. The front of the plaza of Jolo became an arena of war,
several attacks were made on the town, and conditions became so bad
that Rivera requested reënforcements from the Governor-General and
permission to take the field against the hostile parties. The request
was forwarded through the governor of Mindanao, who indorsed the
communication, recommending that he be empowered to decide whether
reënforcements were needed or not, and in case they were needed, to
lead the troops himself. This being granted, the governor of Mindanao
came to Jolo, reported unfavorably, and returned to Zamboanga.


RULE OF SULTAN BADARUD DIN II

Jamalul A'lam died April 8, 1881, but before his death he caused word
to be sent to the governor of Sulu informing him that an attack on
Jolo was imminent. At 3 a.m. on the 10th, the Sulus issued from the
woods and made a general attack on the garrison, which resulted in
failure and in the loss of 103 Sulus, who fell dead in the ditches.

The garrison of Jolo amounted, at that time, to 27 officers and 753
men. All that Colonel Rivera could do was to protect the plaza and keep
himself well informed about matters in general. On April 14, Panglima
Adak brought letters from Inchi Jamila relating to the succession to
the sultanate. She announced that the late Sultan directed in his will
that Amirul Kiram be elected sultan, and she endeavored to influence
the governor in his favor. Rivera expressed himself in favor of Badarud
Din, declaring this to be the only course he could take in conformity
with the terms and intentions of the treaty. This put a quietus on
the cause of dissension and the council of datus voted unanimously
in favor of Badarud Din II, who had just completed his nineteenth year.

In the meantime, disturbances in Sulu had caused some
alarm at Manila and prompt action was taken by the General
Government. Brigadier-General La Corte, who was intending to inspect
the fortifications of the south, was directed temporarily to assume
command of the government of Mindanao and personally to conduct
what operations it might be necessary to undertake on the Island of
Sulu. La Corte came by the way of Cebu and Zamboanga and brought the
Sixth Regiment of Infantry from Cebu and two companies of the Second
Regiment of Infantry from Zamboanga. Soon after his arrival at Jolo,
he addressed a strong letter to Sultan Badarud Din requesting the
punishment of the Sulus who attacked the Plaza of Jolo on April
10. Badarud Din responded promptly and commissioned Datu Pula to go
to Lu'uk and Taglibi and punish the transgressors. This, however,
was not carried out, for Panglima Sakandar of Lu'uk, who was loyal to
the Sultan, placed himself at the service of Badarud Din and promised
to bring the aggressors alive or dead. The Sultan's forces attacked
the rancheria of Maharaja Abdulla, the chief aggressor, and killed
nine men and one datu. The maharaja and the chiefs of seven other
rancherias of Lu'uk then surrendered themselves and swore allegiance
to Spain. The sultan and the chief datus later presented themselves
before General La Corte and reaffirmed their fealty to the Spanish
Government. The Governor-General subsequently wrote a letter to the
Sultan, expressing his pleasure and recognizing the sincere efforts
of the latter to reëstablish peace and tranquillity.

In June, 1881, General La Corte authorized the construction of the
loopholed wall with towers and embrasures to complete the defenses
of the town. He recommended frequent reconnaissances of the interior
and target practice for the forces of the garrison, and advised the
governor to strengthen the hand of the Sultan and to require from him
at the same time strict enforcement of all obligations that tended to
prove the loyalty of his people to the Spanish Government. General
La Corte left Jolo on the 29th of June, taking back the troops of
the Second Regiment of Infantry to Zamboanga.

Governor Rivera was relieved on November 15, 1881, by Col. Isidro
Gutierrez Soto. The new governor exhibited unusual coolness and
personal courage. He visited Maymbung without military escort and
attempted in every way to strengthen his friendship with the Sultan and
datus and to encourage them to have similar confidence in the Spanish
officials; but dissensions among the Sulus and the jealousy of Pangian
Inchi Jamila frustrated all his efforts. Without opposition Badarud
Din might have ruled fairly well, but the plotting of Inchi Jamila
and the unfriendliness of her party made a coward of him. He became
inconsistent and seemed at times to lack confidence in the Spanish
Government. He projected a secret trip to Sandakan and the Spaniards
notified him that in case he left Sulu without the permission of the
Government another sultan would be appointed in his place.

In January, 1882, Bangao was occupied by troops, and part of the
southern squadron was stationed there. In May Siasi was similarly
garrisoned. On April 29, 1882, Governor Soto became ill and left
for Manila. He was relieved temporarily by Brig.-Gen. José Paulin,
who was on a tour of inspection in the south and had come to Jolo to
conduct some official negotiations with the sultan.

On the 2d of June, Col. Eduardo Fernandez Bremon took office as
governor of Sulu. Soon after this time Sultan Badarud Din left
Jolo on a pilgrimage to Mecca and delegated his authority to Datu
Aliyud Din in conjunction with the Sultana Inchi Jamila. Governor
Bremon's command was very eventful and difficult. Cholera came from
Singapore and overran the whole Archipelago. Disturbances increased,
the turbulent inhabitants of Lu'uk became restless and hostile,
and juramentados came so frequently that they actually besieged the
town. The wall and towers and the defensive Barracks of Victory were
finished and these completely checked the entrance of hostile Sulus
into the town. Ladrones and wandering parties infested the suburbs and
hills and communication with Maymbung was broken. In August Governor
Bremon fell ill and asked to be relieved of his command. In September
a general attack on the plaza of Jolo was planned by the Sulus and
conditions assumed a very serious aspect. For one whole month, it is
said, the gates of Jolo were not opened.

The charge of Sulu affairs at this critical stage was intrusted to
General Paulin, who arrived at Jolo on October 1, accompanied by
Col. Julian Gonzalez Parrado, who was appointed to relieve Colonel
Bremon as governor of Sulu. The Sulu squadron was increased and the
garrison of Jolo reënforced. General Paulin conducted an expedition
to Lu'uk to chastise the rancherias of Tu'tu' and Bwal, which were
reported to be the chief centers of hostility and disturbance on the
island. He first called at Maymbung, and pressed upon Datu Aliyud Din
and the council the necessity of their doing their part toward the
punishment of the guilty parties, and Datu Aliyud Din at the head of
a small force accompanied the expedition. Troops were disembarked at
Pandang-pandang, Kadungdung, Tampukan, and Bwal; they burned parts
of these rancherias and made some advances inland. The fighting
was not severe and the Sulus harassed the troops to a considerable
extent. The navy coöperated with the troops, but the expedition was
small and accomplished no significant results.

In his report to the Governor-General, General Paulin recommended the
repetition of such expeditions in order to impress the Sulus with the
superiority of Spanish arms and to punish all transgressors. Commenting
upon the nature of the warfare the expedition experienced he considered
the natural difficulties attending campaigns in the island as being
difficult to overcome. The art of war, he said, has no application as
against Moros. The Sulus, he continued, are either treacherous wild
beasts or fanatical heroes, according to the sentiment which at the
time impels them to fight. They are savage warriors who hide in order
to attack and rise at the feet of the enemy when least expected. They
conceal themselves in clumps of trees and cliffs or ditches, and when
ready to fight, discharge their firearms or throw lances and bolos,
while howling and dancing frantic war dances. They flee after an
attack, but in their flight they attack the rear guard.

Governor Parrado was a man of considerable ability and tact. Confidence
and peace were reëstablished, the datus often came to town and the
people attended the market in large numbers. In December, 1882,
Tata'an, on the northwestern coast of Tawi-tawi, was occupied by
troops.

On his way back from Mecca, Sultan Badarud Din was met at Singapore
by a representative of the Philippine Government, who requested
that he return to Jolo by the way of Manila. The sultan declined,
stating that the recent death of his son made it imperative for him to
return directly to Maymbung, but he promised to visit Manila later. He
reached Sulu in January, 1883. After his arrival he exhibited vigor
and watchfulness and soon prepared to go to Manila. This project
seemed to excite unusual disturbance, bordering on panic at Parang
and Lu'uk, and for fear of undesirable consequences he changed his
mind and gave up the trip.

By his pilgrimage to Mecca, which was the first ever taken by a
Sultan of Sulu, Badarud Din gained respect and influence, but no
sagacity. Desiring to strengthen his authority and to imitate the
European nations by organizing a police force for the sultanate,
he brought 2 Egyptian officers and 30 Sikhs from Singapore and made
arrangements with an English house in Singapore for the purchase of
200 breech-loading rifles. The rifles caused the Spanish Government
some anxiety, but thorough investigation and inquiry proved that they
never went beyond Labuan. The Sikhs were not paid for two months after
arrival at Maymbung and left the service at once. Such organization
meant a first step toward reform, but Badarud Din had no education
worthy of the name and lacked the requisite ability, strength, and
character for carrying on such measures. Soon he acquired the opium
habit and methods of licentious living. He finally lost his hold on
affairs in general.

Datu Aliyud Din removed to Matanda, where a large house was built for
him by the governor of Sulu; and a village of 400 people soon arose
around his residence. The blockhouse of Jovellar was then built near
the beach for his protection and help.

So far the governor of Sulu addressed the sultan as his son, the
sultan addressed the governor as his father and relations were friendly
and pleasant. But in June, 1883, three juramentados slipped into the
post, killed two officers and wounded one officer and two soldiers
before they could be dispatched. Governor Parrado addressed a strong
letter to the sultan requesting the immediate and proper punishment
of the district from which the juramentados came. The sultan neither
responded nor did he send information relative to the place from
which the juramentados came. Governor Parrado then took matters into
his own hand, made an expedition to Taglibi and chastised its chief
Sahibud Din. Soon after, two soldiers were killed in the vicinity of
Jolo while cutting bamboo and another expedition was undertaken to
Buhanginan to punish the murderers. An expedition was also made to
South Ubian, where the pirate Panglima Jami was reported to have taken
refuge. Jami was not found at this place, but the local chiefs burned
Jami's kuta and house and promised to deliver him to the government
when he returned to Ubian.

Governor Parrado proved himself an efficient and able administrator. He
recognized the absurdity of a policy of extermination, and felt
conscious of the lack of a uniform, well-planned and settled policy on
the part of the General Government toward Sulu. He realized that the
Moros possessed a form of civilization and could not be treated like
savages. He used his influence for good in times of peace and employed
his forces to reëstablish peace with justice in times of hostility. He
was strong and sagacious in most of the measures he undertook.

Datu Pula, a strong chief worthy of trust and a man of prestige,
died before the expiration of the year 1883. Pula's influence always
tended toward peace with Spain and the support of Badarud Din against
his rival. His death was consequently a loss to both sides. The sultan
and the governor continued on good terms of friendship during January
and February, 1884, and the affairs of Sulu were conducted smoothly
and peacefully, but on the 22d of February, 1884, Badarud Din died;
the state was soon rent by dissension and another period of trouble
and disturbance followed.


STRUGGLE FOR THE SULTANATE

The question of a successor to Sultan Badarud Din II proved to be very
vexatious, both to the Sulus and to the Spanish Government. At that
date the eligibles to the sultanate belonged to three houses--that
of Sultan Jamalul Kiram I, the house of Sultan Shakirul Lah, and
that of Datu Putung, the son of Sultan Alimud Din I. These houses
were represented by the three candidates, Raja Muda Amirul Kiram,
Datu Aliyud Din, and Datu Harun ar-Rashid.

Amirul Kiram was the oldest brother of the three sons of Sultan
Jamalul A'lam from Pangian Inchi Jamila. He was born on the 27th of
March, 1868, and was at one time the rival of Badarud Din II, his
older brother. The sultanate remained in the line of Jamalul Kiram I
for four consecutive generations and the majority of Sulus had come
to consider the sons of Jamalul A'lam as the direct heirs to the
throne. The influence of Pangian Inchi Jamila was a strong factor
in itself and the claims of Raja Muda Amirul Kiram were vigorously
pressed upon the council of state.

Datu Aliyud Din was the son of Datu Israel, the son of Sultan Shakirul
Lah. He urged that the descendants of Sultan Shakirul Lah had an
equal right to the sultanate with the descendants of Jamalul Kiram I,
and protested against the injustice of electing a minor in preference
to older and maturer members of the family.

Datu Harun ar-Rashid had no sultan in his line for five generations and
consequently did not press his claim to the succession. He was a cousin
of Pangian Inchi Jamila and a close friend of Jamalul A'lam. He was the
only living signer of the treaty of 1878, but since that date he had
removed to Palawan, where the Spanish Government intrusted him with the
rule of the Moro population of Palawan, Balabak, and the neighboring
southern islands, and where he had rendered very creditable service.

Datu Aliyud Din and his party were so determined in their opposition
to Pangian Inchi Jamila and Raja Muda Amirul Kiram that they would not
entertain any proposals of compromise or attend the council of state at
Maymbung. The country was agitated and all datus and subordinate chiefs
took sides with one or the other of the two candidates. The majority
of datus and chiefs were in favor of Amirul Kiram. Datus Pula-pula,
Uyung, Marachak, Kalbi, and Julkarnayn, who were as a rule united,
and who wielded the strongest authority on the island next to that of
the sultan, remained almost neutral, but at heart indorsed the claim
of Aliyud Din. In general the southern and greater half of the island
supported Amirul Kiram of Maymbung, while the northern half favored
Aliyud Din, who had in the meantime moved his residence to Patikul.

Governor Parrado offered his good offices and tried to overcome the
difficulty by suggesting that Amirul Kiram be elected sultan, but that
Aliyud Din should act as regent during the minority of the former. He
went so far as to name a new and general council of state to meet at
Maymbung and decide the question. He submitted this proposition to
both parties threatening to leave them to their fate in case they
did not comply with his advice. The Maymbung party accepted the
governor's proposition, but the Patikul party did not; consequently
both candidates were proclaimed sultans, one at Patikul and one
at Maymbung, and both prepared to fight. Ambuscades, skirmishes,
surprises, robberies, and cattle stealing followed. Governor Parrado
remained neutral until July when he made friendly visits to Maymbung
and Patikul and again counseled concord and compromise. Datu Harun
arrived in Sulu on the 17th of November and both parties solicited his
support and consulted him; but he failed to effect any agreement. A
little later he accompanied the governor of Sulu to Manila where
he received much attention because of the success that attended
his services at Palawan. He remained in Manila about one month and
returned to live at Matanda, filled with a strong desire to better
himself and his country. A year passed and no agreement could be
reached, nor did the Spanish Government officially recognize any of
the claimants. Amirul Kiram indulged in licentiousness and Aliyud
Din took to opium.

Governor Parrado during his administration completed the Cuartel de
España and the market building and improved the forts Alfonso XII
and the Princess of Asturias. The majority of the nipa houses were
replaced by better structures of brick with iron roofs. A system of
waterworks was put in and Jolo was declared an open port. On July 23,
1885, Parrado was succeeded by Col. Francisco Castilla.

Governor Castilla followed the policy of his predecessor and remained
neutral. Amirul Kiram had in the meantime massed a large force and
attacked Aliyud Din. The latter's party had weakened and only 800
remained to defend Patikul and its kuta. The Maymbung forces greatly
outnumbered their adversaries, defeated them, destroyed the kuta,
and burned the settlement. Datu Aliyud Din fled to Basilan and lived
for a while with Sharif Aqil. Raja Muda Amirul Kiram then requested
the Spanish Government to recognize his succession to the sultanate
and a commission was sent from Manila to investigate the matter and
report on it. After five months' service as governor of Sulu Colonel
Castilla asked to be relieved at the end of the year and Col. Juan
Arolas succeeded him in January, 1886.

Governor Arolas devoted himself to his work with unusual enthusiasm
and exemplary energy. Public works and sanitation received his best
attention. Trees were planted, the streets were improved, the gutters
and sewers were repaired and renewed, and the town was kept thoroughly
clean. The death list of the garrison was reduced from 102 in 1885
to 51 in 1886. A good road was constructed outside the wall and a
beautiful street was extended from the southern gate of the town to
Tulay and Asturias on both sides of which coconut and shade trees were
planted. The streets of Tulay were planned on the same scale as those
of the walled town, and fillings on a large scale were commenced for
this purpose. Excellent waterworks were completed and iron pipes were
laid throughout the walled town and Tulay for the use of the garrison
and the public.

As a result of the report of the commission appointed to investigate
Sulu affairs and the subject of succession to the sultanate, directions
were received from Madrid and Manila to the effect that Datu Harun
should be appointed subsultan and Amirul Kiram sultan, and that both
be requested to go to Manila, take the oath of fidelity to Spain,
and be invested with authority by the Governor-General. Datu Harun
had made himself very agreeable to Governors Parrado and Castilla and
a strong friendship had grown up between them. Arolas soon learned to
like Harun and trusted him. Amirul Kiram was then 18 years old and his
age probably suggested the necessity of having a regent who would be
competent to take charge of affairs and who would be favorable to the
policy of the Spanish Government. The wish and opinion of the Sulu
nation and the desire of the ambitious sultana to be regent herself
were not fully respected and could not be approved, and the dictates
of the Spanish Government had to be complied with. Harun, as might
have been expected, obeyed the royal directions. Amirul Kiram refused
to go to Manila, considered it a humiliation for him to have a regent
and to be compelled to visit Manila for the approval of the Spanish
Government. He felt that he was the rightful heir and the choice of
the Sulus and that the treaty of 1878 well guarded his rights and
granted the Sulus the full privilege of electing their chiefs. The
Sulu character asserted itself in his action and the nation stood by
him and counseled noncompliance to directions prejudicial to their
own rights and national honor.


RULE OF SULTAN HARUN

Datu Harun went to Manila alone and Governor Arolas recommended his
appointment as sultan. Governor-General Terrero cabled to Madrid and
obtained authority for this action on September 11, 1886. Harun was
officially announced in Manila as Sultan of Sulu, and his appointment
on the 24th of September was made the occasion of some formality.


    Sultan Harun placed his hands upon the Quran, his Minister
    Sheikh Mustafa bin Ahmad officiating, and his high Excellency the
    Governor-General administered to him the oath in the following
    form: "Do ye swear to uphold steadfastly all the stipulations
    covenanted in the capitulations and to give faithful obedience
    to His Majesty, the King?" To this Sultan Harun answered: "I
    swear to comply with the terms of the capitulations and with the
    commands of His Majesty, the King." And His Excellency replied:
    "May God and men help ye if ye do this and if ye do not, then
    may God and the Government punish you!"


Sultan Harun arrived at Jolo in October, and, escorted by 200
Spanish soldiers, one gunboat, and one steam launch, he proceeded
to Parang where he expected the Sulus to declare their allegiance
to him. However, their reception was not as warm as he expected
and he soon found it to his advantage to retire to Jolo. The Sulu
chiefs appealed to arms and prepared to defend the rights of Amirul
Kiram at the cost of their lives. Desiring to support his nominee in
the sultanate Governor Arolas visited Parang in company with Sultan
Harun on the 2d day of November and an additional number of chiefs,
including Panglima Damang, swore allegiance to Sultan Harun.

Such measures aroused the activity of Amirul Kiram and his party and
several places in Parang were attacked by the Maymbung forces and
considerable unrest prevailed. Harun's sultanate seemed unacceptable
to the great majority of datus, and hostilities arose in many
localities. Murders and juramentado attacks occurred in the vicinity
of Jolo. The kuta of Bwisan and Timahu were attacked and reduced,
the settlements burned, and much blood was shed. Hostilities extended
to Siasi and the kuta of Datu Hiyang was attacked. In February, 1887,
a force of 3,000 Sulus started from Maymbung and attacked Jolo. The
garrison repulsed the attack, but juramentados and hostile bands
harassed the town. Small expeditions reconnoitered Tapul, Lugus,
and Siasi; but no active measures could be taken against Maymbung
until reënforcements could arrive from Zamboanga and Kotabato.

At that time General Terrero headed a campaign in the upper Mindanao
Valley against Datu Utu and forces were drawn from Zamboanga and Jolo
to coöperate at Kotabato. With the return of the troops in April the
war vessels which operated on the Mindanao River also came to Jolo and
Governor Arolas began preparations at once to fight Amirul Kiram who
was strongly intrenched in Maymbung. The gunboats, some marines, and
Sultan Harun's small force attacked the settlement by sea. Governor
Arolas led the land troops himself and marched against Maymbung at
night. The Moros of the interior harassed the advancing troops from
all sides, but everything that could be reached was burned and more
than 40 Sulus were disabled or killed before the fort of Maymbung was
reached. The latter was a square 75 meters on each side, built partly
on land and partly in the water. The walls on the land side were
constructed of coral rock, while those toward the sea were built of
double rows of piles filled behind with stone and earth. Large cannon
and breech-loading rifles were abundantly used by the Sulus and one
rapid-firing gun commanded the main approach on the land side. The
fighting was fierce and heroic on both sides. Out of a large force
of Sulus defending the fort and town 250 lay dead after the battle
was over. The Spaniards lost 17 dead and 96 wounded. The sea forces,
after caring for the Chinese population, set fire to the whole town
and reduced it to ashes. Governor Arolas was highly praised in Manila
and Madrid and was later promoted to be a brigadier-general.

If military operations, war, and death are efficient and suitable
measures to daunt the Sulus, coerce their will, and make them yield
to superior authority, this Maymbung campaign should certainly have
produced the desired result. Many thought that the moral effect of this
victory was excellent beyond measure and for that reason entertained
great hopes. Governor Arolas felt the cause of Spanish sovereignty
and suzerainty to be amply vindicated and Spanish honor strongly and
proudly upheld, but as early as the 9th of May another fight stared
him in the face. Arolas and Sultan Harun had to march against Parang
and invest the kuta of Panglima Damang. After the surrender of Damang
an expedition was sent to Lati and another to Tapul Island. This
latter campaign was extremely difficult and trying. The country was
rough, the forest thick, and the enemy fierce. Panglima Sayadi would
not recognize Harun's sultanate and would not obey the mandates of
the governor of Sulu, so his chastisement was decreed and Tapul was
attacked. Sayadi and his men fought like tigers at bay, and Governor
Arolas was compelled to lead his troops in person. Sayadi was defeated
after two days' fighting, 90 of his men were killed, and the fort was
demolished. The Spanish casualties were 13 dead and 155 wounded. Sultan
Harun reconnoitered the shores and interior of the island, destroyed
small forts, and obtained the surrender of several chiefs.

On the 29th of July, 1887, Pangian Inchi Jamila presented herself at
Jolo and expressed her submission and that of Raja Muda Amirul Kiram
to the governor of Sulu and to Sultan Harun. Governor Arolas insisted
that Amirul Kiram should come personally and express his surrender,
and allowed him ten days in which he could come with safety and
impunity. After her return Pangian Inchi Jamila sent Sultan Harun
the seal of the sultanate; but neither the chiefs nor Amirul Kiram
himself agreed to the personal surrender requested. Governor Arolas was
disposed to make Spanish sovereignty over Sulu a fact, absolute and
complete, and required implicit obedience. The Sulus had a different
view of the respective rights of the two governments and continued
their resistance. Another campaign was necessary on Siasi Island,
and Datu Hiyang and many Moros were killed.

Another expedition was directed against Kadungdung and southern Lu'uk
and another against the Island of Pata. Innumerable hardships were
sustained by the troops and many Sulus were killed. Sultan Harun
and his forces coöperated with the Spanish forces and reconnoitered
inaccessible places. The partisans of the young Raja Muda Amirul Kiram
were supposed to have been completely vanquished and the young prince
was expected to humiliate himself before Sultan Harun at any time. Such
hopes were, however, false, for on October 30 Bwal and the northern
Lu'uk district had to be punished. After some fighting the Sulus
evacuated Bwal and fled to the mountains and 53 houses were reduced to
ashes; nor was this sufficient, for in 1888 expeditions amounting in
some cases to 1,500 troops, comprising from two to four companies of
artillery, were conducted against Purul, Tambang, Patikul, Taglibi,
Buhanginan, Pandan, Sari`ul, and Pigi-Dahu. Hundreds and probably
thousands of Sulus were killed, but notwithstanding, Arolas's cruel
efforts to force Sultan Harun upon the people resulted in failure. The
Sulus scorned Sultan Harun and his apparent supremacy, persisted in
their resistance, and kept their allegiance to Amirul Kiram. True to
their traditions they remained faithful to the candidate whose right
to the succession was in their estimation and conviction stronger
than any other claim backed by the forces of General Arolas.

Before the end of the year 1886 Datu Uyung invited Datu Aliyud Din
back to Patikul, where he remained for about one year. Datus Kalbi
and Julkarnayn joined the party of Aliyud Din and defended him against
Amirul Kiram and Sultan Harun.

In 1887 Patikul and Lati were attacked by Governor Arolas and Datu
Aliyud Din fled to Siasi and Laminusa, from there he returned, late in
1888, to Bunbun and Patikul; there he lived quietly until his death,
about 1892.

The administration of Governor Arolas was the longest in duration,
the most eventful, the most interesting, and the most warlike
administration Sulu had under Spanish rule. The difficult situation
the governor found at his arrival, his misunderstanding of the Sulu
character and underestimation of Sulu public opinion, his integrity,
his exalted opinion of Spanish sovereignty and honor, his disregard of
treaties and precedent, his ability as a commander of troops, and his
warlike policy, all combine to make a picture vivid in its colors and
unique in its make-up. Governor Arolas can not be held responsible
for what had transpired prior to his appointment as governor, and
the policy he followed was probably dictated for him in general
from Manila; but it is difficult to conceive of a man executing
his duty with such vigor, earnestness, and thoroughness as General
Arolas did, unless his heart and soul approved of such a policy and
added enthusiasm and zest to the impetus of duty. Furthermore, there
are many reasons for believing that Governor Arolas recommended the
main lines of the policy he pursued. At all events he impersonates,
as far as the object of this work is concerned, that combined agency
of government which is responsible for the significant events of
his administration of Sulu affairs. In commenting upon his policy
it would therefore be proper to refer to him personally, without the
least intention of fixing the blame on anybody, or indeed of finding
fault at all, but with the sole intention of eliciting the facts and
showing the actual condition of affairs in their proper light.

In going over the long list of expeditions and campaigns conducted
by General Arolas and of the casualties on both sides, one can not
help but express admiration, surprise, or blame as to the justice
or advisability of the policy pursued, its motives, conduct, and
effect. For, if the treaty of 1878 was still in force--and there is
no reason to suppose that it was abrogated--why did Governor Arolas
institute new rules and conditions pertaining to the sultanate
and render compliance with them necessary for qualification and
confirmation? If by virtue of the prerogative of sovereignty it was
deemed necessary to interfere with Sulu internal affairs and customs
for a beneficial and good purpose, why was it not right then to
oppose and check Datu Aliyud Din as soon as it became evident that the
majority of the Sulus wanted Amirul Kiram as sultan and Aliyud Din had
refused to honor the governor's proposals and recommendations? Why was
it not considered right for the Government to object to war between
the contending parties from the beginning and to assume for itself
all the powers and prerogatives of a protector or arbitrator? If the
good of the Sulus was the ultimate object sought, why was not the
rightful heir supported from the beginning and advantage taken of
such an opportunity to enlist the sympathy of one party, at least,
on the side of the Government, strengthen the weak head of the nation,
and bring order and tranquillity out of chaos and anarchy?

Apparently the worthy cause of peace and Sulu welfare were
completely overlooked, while the main object of asserting power
and gaining supremacy was pressed and prosecuted at the expense
of a thousand souls and war with every strong chief throughout the
whole Archipelago. Governor Arolas trampled on the treaty, assumed
arbitrary and absolute authority, and treated noncompliance with
his wishes as disloyalty and insurrection. This attitude might have
been due to his peculiar military training and ideas, but it was
certainly unjust and overbearing. Nations can not be trampled under
foot without bringing about resentment and retaliation and people
can not be treated as privates in a company of disciplinarios or
deportados. The result of such coercion is hatred, and the effect
of abuse is enmity. Such methods do not tend to civilize a country
or better its chances of progress. They kill ambition, harden the
heart, and dull the senses. The first step toward the progress of
a subordinate nation is imitation of its superior; but imitation is
generally engendered by admiration and kindly influences, and cruel
warlike measures are certainly disposed to kill such good agencies.

Sulu military operations ceased soon after the arrival of
Governor-General Weyler in Manila, and some of the Jolo forces were
withdrawn.

General Arolas left Jolo in 1893 and was succeeded by Col. Cesar
Mattos, who was in turn followed by Gen. Venancio Hernandez before the
end of the same year. The successors of General Arolas did not have
similar motives for upholding Harun's sultanate against overwhelming
odds. They saw in him a weak and vacillating sultan who was a burden
to the state. Consequently Sultan Harun was relieved in 1894, and he
returned to his home in Palawan. During his incumbency Sultan Harun
lived at Mubu in the vicinity of Jolo. The house he occupied was the
best building ever occupied by a Sulu sultan. He was ambitious and
willing to reform his people, but he never had a strong following
and was very unfortunate in that he had to fight so hard and so often
for a nominal allegiance and false support from his people.


RULE OF SULTAN JAMALUL KIRAM II

Raja Muda Amirul Kiram, who fought and suffered so long for the throne
of his father and brother, succeeded Sultan Harun and assumed the
name of Sultan Jamalul Kiram II. He was not obliged to go to Manila
in order to be vested with proper authority by the Governor-General,
but it seems that he pledged himself in one way or another to pay some
tribute to the Spanish Government, and consequently a decree was issued
by Governor-General Blanco on March 1, 1894, directing a general census
of the Moros of the Sulu Archipelago and the collection of a tax of 1
real [222] from each individual. The proceeds of this tribute, after
deducting the allowances made for the interpreters and collectors,
were to be devoted to the development of the institutions of Jolo, and
especially to the construction of roads. It is said that the sultan
was unable and unwilling to collect the tribute so decreed, but that
he paid from his own purse the sum of P10,000 or its equivalent on
the basis of a population of 100,000 and at the rate of 1 real per
person. The collection of this tax was abandoned in the following
year and was never resumed.

The Sulus' adherence to the cause of Jamalul Kiram II was not based on
any personal influence he exerted on the people, but on the influence
of his mother and the people's devotion to the house of Jamalul Kiram
I. Datu Aliyud Din's claim was theoretically strong, but for various
reasons his party weakened; while Amirul Kiram, though a fugitive,
gradually gained in influence and rose to power.

The administration of Governor Hernandez was the longest in duration
next to that of Governor Arolas and was, on the whole, peaceful and
tranquil. On one occasion in 1895 hostilities broke out with Datus
Julkarnayn and Kalbi, and the Sulus of Lati and Patikul attacked
the town of Jolo causing several casualties. However, peace was
soon restored by Governor-General Blanco and no further hostilities
occurred. Governor Hernandez built the direct road, known as the
Asturias Road, which leads from the gate of the walled town to Fort
Asturias. About 1897 General Hernandez was relieved by Col. (later
Brig.-Gen.) Luis Huerta, the last Spanish governor of Sulu.

Spain evacuated Sulu in May, 1899, and Jolo was garrisoned by American
troops on the same day. On the 20th of August Gen. J. C. Bates
concluded a treaty with Sultan Jamalul Kiram II, generally known as
the "Bates Agreement," and the sovereignty of Sulu passed from Spain
to the United States of America. [223]