CHAPTER IV

DECLINE OF SULU, 1851-1896


EXPEDITION AGAINST JOLO

The fearlessness of the Moros in battle, their determination,
persistence, and fortitude must have disheartened the Spaniards
very often in their weary attempts to conquer and pacify Sulu. The
Sulus have never had any standing army. Every able-bodied male was
a soldier and a sailor. Thousands of Sulus and Samals stood ready
at a moment's notice to man a fleet and defend a fort. Every fort
the Spaniards reduced the Sulus could rebuild in a short time;
every fleet destroyed they could replace with little expense. They
had enough pearls to purchase guns and ammunition, and a few months
after a defeat they were ready to fight again, better prepared than
before. War with Sulu, in the way it was conducted, meant a war of
extermination and hostilities without end. Its worst evils befell the
helpless natives of the coast settlements of the Bisayas and southern
Luzon to whom Spain was unable to afford safe protection. The Moros
would slip through in the night or take advantage of a favorable wind
and attack the Spanish forces or the defenseless villages while they
were unaware of danger or unprepared for a fight. For a long while it
seemed beyond the power of the Philippine Government to reëstablish
peace or restrict hostilities to Sulu waters. The magnificent victory
of Claveria was hailed as marking the beginning of a new era of safety
and glory, but its effects did not last long, and the fear of the
Moros beset the hearts of the Bisayans once more.

In the light of such profound experience as the Philippine Government
had had with Moro affairs Governor Urbiztondo might have contented
himself with punishing the Moros of Tonkil and their abettors and
allies, but another element of serious concern entered into the
problem which threatened not only to render it more vexatious and
unsolvable, but dangerous in the extreme. It was not so much the evils
of disturbed relations with Sulu as the harm that would arise from
English occupation of or alliance with Sulu that Urbiztondo feared,
for in 1849, Sir James Brooke visited Jolo and made a treaty with the
Sultan of Sulu, [210] the seventh article of which declared a promise
made by the Sultan of Sulu not to make any cessions of territory within
his dominion nor recognize sovereignty rights nor promise fealty to any
nation without the consent of Great Britain. The overt object of this
treaty was "to keep open for the benefit of the mercantile world that
improvable field for commercial enterprise," but the ultimate purpose
of such an agreement was not difficult to foresee. The governor of
Zamboanga went to Jolo and protested strongly, declaring such a treaty
an act of disloyalty to Spain, for which the Sultan and his council
would be held responsible. The subject was debated with considerable
feeling on both sides. The governor remained at Jolo twenty-seven
days and returned without advantage.

The treaty was never ratified by Great Britain, but such endeavors on
the part of a strong maritime European power made it necessary for
Spain to act decisively and expeditiously. Urbiztondo then pressed
to the attention of Sultan Pulalun and his council the necessity of
punishing the Samals of Tonkil for their depredations on Samar and
Kamigin and requested the return of the captives whom they carried
away. Considerable controversy followed and the Sulus pretended that
they were unable to punish Tonkil, but offered no objection to its
castigation by the Philippine Government.

Aware of the seriousness of the situation, Urbiztondo made preparations
for war and decided to attack not Tonkil only, but Jolo also, repeating
there the example of Balangingi, and to bring Sulu under the control
of Spain. Referring to this cause, Captain Keppel, in his "Visit to
the Indian Archipelago," makes the following remarks:


    His [the Sultan's] fortified position gave him weight, which he
    had frequently thrown into the scale of humanity: and it must
    now be feared that many whom he was able to hold in check will
    again follow their evil propensities unrestrained, as they did
    under previous dynasties.

    The resentment of Spain, as visited upon the Sultan of Sulu, seems
    equally impolitic and unjust. The pretext was piracy, of which
    some solitary instance may very possibly have been established
    against a Sulu prahu; but the Sultan was certainly sincere in his
    wish to coöperate against that system. There is ground to fear
    that national jealousy was desirous of striking its puny blow
    at an European rival, through the degradation of the Sultan of
    Sulu--that he has incurred, in fact, the resentment of the Spanish
    colonial governors, by those commercial treaties with ourselves
    which were but lately concluded by Sir James Brooke. [211]


On the 11th day of December, 1850, Urbiztondo left Manila in command
of a force consisting of 100 troops of artillery, 500 of infantry, 2
mountain howitzers, and a number of irregular troops and workmen. Two
steamboats, one corvette, and one brigantine carried the troops
to Zamboanga, where they arrived on the 20th. Here 2 companies of
infantry and 102 volunteers and 6 tenders under the command of the
governor of Zamboanga joined the expedition. At Belun they burned
250 houses and 20 vintas. A small force of Moros was encountered,
of which they killed 3 and captured 17 prisoners, one of whom was a
panglima. The chief of Bukutwan surrendered and promised to remain
obedient to Spain. At Tonkil bad weather was encountered and the
whole expedition turned toward Jolo.

Jolo was well fortified. It had five forts on the sea front, the
strongest two of which were that of the Sultan on the right and that of
Datu Daniel on the hill. Three other forts were located on prominent
points at the base of the hills. The town was further defended by a
double line of trenches, other fortifications and much artillery. The
population was estimated at 6,000 Moros and 500 Chinese.

The fleet saluted the town and anchored in the roadstead. Two
officers were sent ashore to notify the Sultan of the presence of
the Governor-General and of his wish to have an interview with the
Sultan and two of his datus, on board. The people were excited to such
a high degree, that the mob grew violent and uncontrollable as the
officers drew near the shore. Insults and weapons were hurled at them
from every side, and the people shouted to them to return lest they be
killed. They, however, pushed on in the direction of the Sultan's fort,
where some datus came out to meet and protect them. Even then spears
were thrown at them, and one of the datus had to use his kampilan in
order to enforce his orders. The Sultan at last came out personally,
embraced the officers, and conducted them to the audience hall. There
the message was delivered to the Sultan and his council, but they
all refused to go on board. The officers met the same difficulty
in leaving the Sultan's house as in coming in, and as soon as they
embarked five shots were discharged at them by the mob. The officers
reported that the town had more than 10,000 fighting men and that
it was well provisioned and well defended, and that all the women
and children were removed to the mountains. Urbiztondo decided that
his forces and provisions were inadequate for the occasion and did
not risk a combat. On January 1, 1851, as the fleet was preparing to
sail away, the Sulus fired at it, killing seven, wounding four, and
damaging the hulls of some of the vessels. The fleet returned the fire,
but kept moving, and sailed away in the direction of Tonkil. Here
the expedition met no organized resistance. Six hundred men were
disembarked, fought some armed parties, caught 4 and killed 25 men,
and rescued 29 captives. About 1,000 houses and 106 boats were burned,
and the fleet then returned to Zamboanga.

Here Urbiztondo made further and extensive preparations to strengthen
his expedition. The commanding marine officer was sent to Manila
with special instructions to augment the fleet and bring sufficient
ammunition and provisions. The Augustinian friar Pascual Ibañez
raised a force of 750 Cebuans and 21 barangay, or large boats, and
volunteered his help. Lumber was cut at Basilan, and lankan, [212]
rafts, and ladders were constructed. Volunteers were further called
for, and a large fleet of war vessels and transports was assembled
at Zamboanga February 12, 1851.

Besides the staff, engineers, surgeons, and chaplains, the reënforced
expedition contained 11 officers and 253 privates of artillery, 1
officer and 30 privates of sappers, 123 officers and 2,593 privates
of infantry, 525 volunteers from Cebu, 100 from Iloilo, and 300 from
Zamboanga; in all 142 officers, 2,876 privates, and 925 volunteers,
besides rowers and other workmen. The vessels carrying the forces
were 1 corvette, 1 brigantine, 3 steamboats, 2 gunboats, 9 tenders,
9 transports, and 21 barangay, with various vintas, [213] lankan,
and rafts. On February 19 mass was celebrated and the expedition
started for the haughty and arrogant city.

Jolo was reached on the 27th and the fleet anchored in two divisions
opposite both sides of the town. The troops disembarked at dawn next
morning and engaged the enemy as both divisions of the fleet began
a simultaneous bombardment of the town and forts. The marksmanship
of the Sulus and Spaniards was splendid, and the guns of the forts
were very active. The spectacle was magnificent, the attack was most
valorous, and the defense most valiant. In the heat of battle one
friar was killed as he was scaling the wall and three officers fell
by his side and lay surrounded by 70 corpses of Sulus. After several
attempts one of the forts on the northeast side was taken by storm and
the escaping Sulus made for Daniel's fort. As they were admitted into
the latter, it was rushed by the Spanish troops who entered in spite
of the desperate resistance the Sulus made. As the inner inclosure was
gained the Sulus hurled themselves from the parapets and fled. The
fighting continued until next day, when every fort was reduced, and
the Sulus evacuated the town. The casualties of the attacking forces
were 36 dead and 92 wounded, while the Sulus lost 300 dead. The whole
town was burned to ashes and 112 pieces of artillery were taken. After
four days, the Governor-General and his council decided to evacuate
the town and sailed away, leaving it ungarrisoned. They evidently
thought that their purpose was accomplished and that they could not
afford to leave a force sufficiently strong to defend the place.

On April 30 a treaty was made with Sultan Pulalun by the
politico-military governor of Zamboanga, Col. José Maria de Carlos. The
treaty was declared to be "an act of incorporation of the sultanate
of Sulu to the Spanish Monarchy." The Sulus understood it to be a firm
agreement and friendly union with Spain. They, however, appear to have
recognized the supremacy of Spain and accepted her protectorate. They
agreed to use the Spanish flag and prohibit piracy. They further
bound themselves not to make any treaties with any nation other
than Spain nor to build forts nor to import firearms without her
permission. Spain promised to respect and recognize the ranks of
the Sultan and datus and to protect Sulu boats everywhere and to
the same extent as Spanish boats. Duties on foreign boats were to
be paid to the Sulus. Religious liberty was guaranteed. The Sultan
issued passports to the Sulus and countersigned Spanish passports
given to people entering the ports of Sulu.

It was agreed that Spain would build a trading post at Jolo and
establish a small garrison for its protection. The Sultan and the
datus resumed their residence in the town of Jolo, with apparently
very little change from former conditions.

In consideration of the losses incurred by the Sultan and datus
through the destruction of their houses and town, and on condition
that the Sulus aid in the construction and protection of the Jolo
trading post, annuities were granted to the Sultan, three datus,
and one subordinate chief.

The treaty was written in both Spanish and Sulu and was signed and
sealed by both parties. Complete and exact translations of the Spanish
and Sulu copies of this treaty have been carefully made and are here
given in full. The Sulu copy of the treaty appears to have been written
or dictated by interpreters not versed in Sulu, and the difference in
text is such as would easily explain the frequent misunderstandings
between the Spanish officials and the Sulu authorities in cases
pertaining to the application of the terms of this treaty.


TREATY OF APRIL 30, 1851


    SULTANATE OF SULU

    Act of Incorporation into the Spanish Monarchy, April 30, 1851


    Solemn declaration of incorporation and adhesion to the Sovereignty
    of Her Catholic Majesty Isabel II, Constitutional Queen of Spain,
    and of submission to the Supreme Government of the Nation, made
    by His High Excellency the Sultan of Sulu, Mohammed Pulalun,
    Datus Mohammed Buyuk, Muluk, Daniel Amil Bahar, Bandahala, Muluk
    Kahar, Amil Badar, Tumanggung, Juhan, Sanajahan, Na'ib, Mamancha
    and Sharif Mohammed Binsarin, in the name and in representation
    of the whole island of Sulu, to Colonel José María de Carlos y
    O'Doyle, Politico-Military Governor of the Province of Zamboanga,
    islands of Basilan, Pilas, Tonkil, and those adjacent thereto,
    as Plenipotentiary specially authorized by His Excellency Antonio
    de Urbiztondo, Marquis of Solana, Governor and Captain-General
    of the Philippine Islands.

    Article I. His Excellency the Sultan of Sulu, for himself, his
    heirs and descendants, Datus Mohammed Buyuk, Muluk, Daniel Amil
    Bahar, Bandahala, Muluk Kahar, Amil Badar, Tumanggung, Juhan,
    Sanajahan, Na'ib, Mamancha and Sharif Mohammed Binsarin, all of
    their own free will, declare: That, for the purpose of making
    amends to the Spanish Nation for the outrage committed against
    it on the first of January of this year, they desire and request
    that the island of Jolo and all its dependencies be incorporated
    with the Crown of Spain, which for several centuries has been
    their only sovereign and protectress, making on this day a new
    solemn declaration of adhesion and submission and recognizing
    Her Catholic Majesty Isabel II, Constitutional Queen of Spain,
    and those who may succeed her in this supreme dignity, as their
    rightful Sovereign Lords and Protectors, in virtue of the treaties
    made in old times, of the treaty of 1836 and the additions made
    thereto by the present governor of Zamboanga in August, and also
    and very particularly of the recent conquest of Jolo on the 28th of
    February of the present year by Captain-General Antonio Urbiztondo,
    Marquis of Solana and Governor-General of the Philippine Islands.

    Article 2. The Sultan and Datus solemnly promise to maintain the
    integrity of the territory of Sulu and all its dependencies as
    a part of the Archipelago belonging to the Spanish Government.

    Article 3. The island of Sulu and all its dependencies having been
    incorporated with the Crown of Spain, and the inhabitants thereof
    being part of the great Spanish family which lives in the vast
    Philippine Archipelago, the Sultan and Datus shall not be empowered
    to make or sign treaties, commercial agreements or alliances of
    any kind with European powers, companies, persons or corporations,
    and Malayan sultans or chiefs, under pain of nullity; they declare
    all treaties made with other powers to be null and void if they
    are prejudicial to the ancient and indisputable rights held by
    Spain over the entire Sulu Archipelago as part of the Philippine
    Islands, and they ratify, renew and leave in force all documents
    containing clauses favorable to the Spanish Government that may
    have been drawn up before this date, however old they may be.

    Article 4. They renew the solemn promise not to carry on piracy
    or allow anybody to carry on piracy within the dominions of Sulu,
    and to run down those who follow this infamous calling, declaring
    themselves enemies of all islands that are enemies of Spain and
    allies of all her friends.

    Article 5. From this day forth the island of Sulu shall fly the
    Spanish national flag in its towns and on its ships, and the Sultan
    and other constituted authorities shall use the Spanish war flag,
    under the principles in use in other Spanish possessions, and
    shall use no other either on land or on sea.

    Article 6. The island of Sulu and its dependencies having been
    declared an integral part of the Philippine Archipelago, which
    belongs to Spain, commerce under the Spanish flag in all the
    ports of the Sultanate shall be free and unmolested, as it is in
    all the ports belonging to the Nation.

    Article 7. The Sultan and Datus of Sulu, having recognized the
    sovereignty of Spain over their territory, which sovereignty is
    now strongly established, not only by right of conquest but by
    the clemency of the conqueror, they shall not erect fortifications
    of any kind in the territory under their command without express
    permission of His Excellency the Governor-General of these Islands;
    the purchase and use of all kinds of firearms shall be prohibited
    except with a license issued by the same supreme authority,
    and craft found with arms other than the edged weapons which
    have from time immemorial been in use in the country shall be
    considered as enemies.

    Article 8. The Spanish Government, as an unequivocal proof of
    the protection which it grants the Sulus, will give the Sultan
    and Datus adequate Royal titles establishing their authority and
    their rank.

    Article 9. The Spanish Government guarantees with all solemnity
    to the Sultan and other inhabitants of Sulu the free exercise of
    their religion, with which it will not interfere in the slightest
    way, and it will also respect their customs.

    Article 10. The Spanish Government also guarantees the right
    of succession to the present Sultan and his descendants in the
    order established and as long as they observe these agreements,
    and equally guarantees the rank and dignities of the privileged
    classes, which shall retain all their rights.

    Article 11. Sulu ships and goods shall enjoy in Spanish ports,
    without any distinction whatever, the same privileges and
    advantages granted the natives of the Philippine Islands.

    Article 12. Except in the case of Spanish ships, the duties that
    constitute the income with which the Sultan and Datus maintain
    their respective ranks shall remain in force, so that they may
    continue to keep up the proper splendor and decorum of their
    station; for this purpose said duties shall be paid by all ships
    coming to their ports; other measures will be taken later on to
    enhance their dignity and increase their prestige.

    Article 13. For the purpose of assuring and strengthening the
    authority of the Sultan, and also of promoting a regular trade
    which may enrich the island of Sulu, a trading post, garrisoned by
    Spanish forces, shall be established as soon as the Government so
    orders, and in accordance with Article 3 of the Treaty of 1836;
    for the building of the trading post the Sultan, Datus, and
    natives shall give all the assistance in their power and furnish
    native labor, which will be paid for, and all necessary materials,
    which they will charge at the regular market prices.

    Article 14. The trading post shall be established at the place
    called Daniel's Kuta, next to the roadstead, as it is the most
    suitable place; but care shall be taken not to encroach in any way
    on the native cemetery, which has to be religiously respected, and
    no buildings whatever shall be erected in said cemetery, so as to
    avoid the trouble that would ensue to those who might build there.

    Article 15. The Sultan of Sulu may issue passports to all persons
    within his dominions that may request them, and fix the amount
    of the fees; he is also authorized to countersign or place his
    seal on the passports of Spaniards visiting his place of residence.

    Article 16. In view of the Sultan's declarations regarding the
    losses suffered by him in the destruction by fire of his forts
    and palace, and convinced of the reality of the losses, the
    Spanish Government grants him an annuity of 1,500 pesos in order
    to indemnify him in a certain way for these losses and at the same
    time to help him to maintain, with proper splendor, the decorum due
    his person and his rank. The same considerations induce the Spanish
    Government to grant Datu Mohammed Buyuk, Muluk and Datu Daniel Amil
    Bahar 600 pesos per annum each, and 360 pesos to Sharif Mohammed
    Binsarin on account of his good services to the Spanish Government.

    Article 17. The articles contained in this solemn Act shall
    go this day into full effect, subject however to the superior
    approval of His Excellency the Governor-General of these Philippine
    Islands. Any doubt which may arise in regard to the text of this
    Act shall be resolved by adhering to the literal meaning of the
    Spanish text.

    Signed at Jolo on the 19th of April 1851.--Seal of the
    Sultan.--Seals of Datus Muluk Kahar; Tumanggung; Sanajahan;
    Mamancha; Muluk Bandahala; Amil-Badar; Juhan; Na'ib; and signature
    of Sharif Mohammed Binsarin.--The Politico-Military Governor of
    the province of Zamboanga etc.: José María de Carlos y O'Doyle.

    I, Don Antonio de Urbiztondo y Eguía, Marquis de la Solana, Knight
    Grand Cross of the Royal American Order of Isabel the Catholic,
    Knight of the Royal Order of San Fernando of the first and third
    class, and of that of San Hermanegildo, Lieutenant-General of the
    National Forces, Governor and Captain-General of the Philippine
    Islands, President of the Royal Audiencia of the Philippine
    Islands, Judge-Subdelegate of Post Office Revenues, Vice-Royal
    Patron, and Director-General of the troops, etc., approve, confirm
    and ratify this capitulation in the name of Her Majesty Isabel II.


    Manila, April 30, 1851.--Antonio de Urbiztondo.

    True copy.--Seal of the Captain-General of the Philippines.


    Royal order approving the salaries assigned to the Sultan and
    Datus of Sulu, December 14, 1851.

    The Queen (whom God save), in view of the letter of Your Excellency
    of May 3rd last, No. 1236, and of the report of the Secretary of
    State on the subject, has been pleased to approve the salaries
    assigned by Article 16 of the Capitulation to the Sultan and Datus
    of Sulu, and amounting to 1,500 pesos for the Sultan, 600 pesos
    for each of the Datus Mohammed Buyuk Muluk and Daniel Amil Bahar,
    and 360 for Sharif Binsarin.


    By Royal order etc.

    Madrid, December 14, 1851.

    The Intendant of the Philippines.


TRANSLATION OF THE SULU TEXT OF THE TREATY OF 1851

    A statement of firm agreement and union (in friendship) made by
    the Queen Spain Isabel II, Constitutional Queen of all Spain, and
    the honorable officers of her government, with the Mawlana Sultan
    Mohammed Pulalun and the Datus Mohammed Buyuk, Muluk, Amil Bahar,
    Bandahala, Muluk Kahar, Amil Badar, Tumanggung, Juhan, Sawja'an,
    Na'ib, Mamancha, and Tuan Sharif Mohammed Binsarin.

    The King was represented here by Colonel Don José María de Carlos
    y O'Doyle, Politico-Military Governor of the Province of Zamboanga
    and islands of Basilan, Pilas, Tonkil, and others, who was given
    power and authority by General Don Antonio de Urbiztondo, Marquis
    of Solana, Governor and Great Captain of the Philippine Islands.

    Article I. The Mahasari Mawlana Sultan of Sulu and his ministers
    together with the datus mentioned above have the great desire to
    state that they had good intentions toward the people of Spain,
    on January 1, of this year. They also state that the relation
    of Sulu and its dependencies to Spain has been one of intimate
    union from the first until now.

    They make anew, to-day, a firm agreement of union in friendship
    with the Queen of Spain Isabel II, Constitutional Queen of All
    Spain, and all her honorable officers, to reaffirm the previous
    agreement of 1836, as also the agreement of last year made with
    the governor of Zamboanga, in the month of August, which fully
    affirmed the "Kunkista" [214] of Sulu which was effected on the
    28th of February, this year, by Señor the excellent Don Antonio
    Urbiztondo, Marquis of Solana, Governor and great Captain of the
    Philippine Archipelago.

    Article II. The Sultan and Datus promise with firm intention and
    brotherhood not to revoke their agreement to the occupation of
    Sulu and its dependencies, regarding them as dependencies of Spain.

    Article III. Sulu and her dependencies alike use the Spanish flag;
    the people of Sulu and her dependencies are one with the people
    of Spain, and ally themselves to the Philippine Islands.

    It shall not be right for the Sultan and the Datus to make treaties
    with Malay datus or any nation other than Spain, whether that
    nation is Spain's ally or not. Should such treaties be made they
    would be null. So also they can not make any contracts with any
    persons other than Spaniards, nor any agreement contrary to the
    previous ones. Such agreements, if made, will not be binding
    because Spain is in all the islands of Sulu as she is in her
    Philippine Islands, and Sulu has previous friendship treaties
    with Spain.

    Article IV. New promise: Pirates shall not be allowed at all
    here in Sulu. Should they commit any crime they shall be punished
    wherever they may be.

    Article V. The subordinate rulers, and all boats, from this day
    on, shall use the Spanish flag, but the Sultan and the Datus can
    use a war flag like the Spanish officials. They will not use any
    other flag.

    Article VI. The Island of Sulu and all its dependencies large
    and small, being the same as the Philippine Islands in that they
    belong to Spain, all Spanish officers and all ships flying the
    Spanish flag may navigate through the Sulu Archipelago without
    any objection.

    Article VII. It is recognized by the Sultan and the Datus that
    the King of Spain is powerful these days and is just and merciful
    in acquiring "Kunkista," and that it is not right to build forts
    without informing the Spanish Government nor to buy arms without
    having also informed the Spanish Government, nor to have boats
    carry any arms except the kris and the spear, for other arms are
    signs of enmity.

    Article VIII. The Spanish Government, wishing to promote fellowship
    with the people of Sulu, gives the sultan and the datus titulu
    (titles) to increase their respect and honor.

    Article IX. The Spanish Government assures the Sultan and all
    the people that it will let their religion alone, and that it
    will not try to change their religion, nor object to the free
    exercise of their worship and the customs of their race.

    Article X. The Spanish Government does also promise the people and
    the Sultan that it will not break its word. It also promises to
    recognize the ranks of the Sultan and the Datus, and also those
    of subordinate rulers and the people.

    Article XI. Sulu boats and goods may go to Spanish countries
    without any objection, in the same manner as if they belonged to
    that country.

    Article XII. All ships that come to Sulu, except those of Spain,
    pay duties as previously, in order that the Sultan and the Datus
    may get a share of the income of their towns, and may adopt
    measures which will improve and benefit the town.

    Article XIII. If the power of the Sultan is well established and
    sustained, he may be able to secure other profits besides this,
    by helping the Spanish Government, in accordance with Article 3
    of the treaty of 1836, providing for the building of a trading
    post which would be guarded by Spain. It will be proper for the
    Sultan and the Datus to help in the erection of this trading post,
    and all labor and lumber shall be paid for according to the custom
    of the place.

    Article XIV. This trading post shall be built near the site of
    the fort of Amil Bahar. [215] It shall not encroach upon nor
    cause any injury to the cemetery of the Mohammedans, but out of
    due respect to their religion no house shall be erected there,
    and in case any be erected it shall be destroyed.

    Article XV. The Sultan of Sulu has the right to give passports
    to all of his people who request it, sign those which he issues,
    and countersign Spanish passports coming to Sulu.

    Article XVI. The Spanish Government, forgiving the previous
    offenses of the Sultan, and in consideration of the destruction by
    fire of his palace and his fort, grants the Sultan a yearly sum
    of P1,500 as a help and an indemnity for his losses. The Spanish
    Government also grants to each of the Datus Mohammed Buyuk, Muluk,
    and Amil Bahar, P600 a year, and to Tuan Sharif Mohammed Binsarin
    P360 on account of his good services to Spain.

    Article XVII. The articles of this treaty shall take effect
    to-day. They shall be shown to the Captain-General of the
    Philippine Islands lest he would not agree to them. They are also
    in Spanish.


This treaty gained its purpose in that it checkmated the agreement
of Sir James Brooke, but it certainly did not receive as much
consideration at Jolo and Zamboanga as it did at Madrid and London. Its
effect was temporary only. As early as 1854 a town on Kapul was burned
by the Spanish forces from Basilan. In 1855 the Sulus made a dash upon
Zamboanga and burned the best part of the town. The "Light Fleet"
issued from Isabela de Basilan in 1857, surprised Simisa, rescued
76 captives, and took 116 prisoners. The chiefs against whom the
expedition was directed presented themselves later to the governor of
Zamboanga and exchanged the Moro prisoners for 60 Christian captives,
1 priest, and 1 European woman. Many pirates continued to scour the
remote parts of the Archipelago. In 1858 Governor-General Norzagaray
published a proclamation calling the attention of chiefs of provinces
and municipalities to the approach of the season at which the pirates
appear, and invoking their aid to caution the people and to take proper
measures for the defense of their towns. Rewards were also offered for
catching or killing pirates and for seizing their boats wherever found,
but this had no important effect. In 1860 about 400 Moros raided the
Straits of San Bernardino and plundered several settlements.

The year 1861 marks a new era in the history of piracy and a new
step in the organization of government for Mindanao and Basilan. At
this time Spain and the Philippines were passing through a period of
progress. Alive to the truth that commerce and piracy can not coexist,
the government provided a competent naval force by which it was able
to maintain unquestionable supremacy in the Sulu Sea. It purchased
eighteen steam vessels in England and used them for chasing Moro
pirates and for blockading the port of Jolo. The operations conducted
by these vessels drove away hordes of pirates from Philippine waters,
and, in the course of a decade, terminated that long term of piracy
under which the Islands had suffered for three centuries.


POLITICO-MILITARY GOVERNMENT OF MINDANAO AND ADJACENT ISLANDS

Affairs in Mindanao had progressed so satisfactorily that Pollok,
Kotabato, and Davao were occupied by permanent garrisons, and peace
and tranquillity reigned over the Celebes Sea. A politico-military
government was then established for all the pacified territory
of Mindanao and Basilan, and was designated as the Government
of Mindanao. It comprised six districts, the first five of which
belonged entirely to the Island of Mindanao. The sixth was called the
district of Basilan and was defined as "comprising Basilan and the
Spanish possessions in the Archipelago of Sulu." Sulu was not brought
under this organization until 1878, when an additional district was
created for this purpose. The form of this government and its chief
characteristics are best described in the words of the royal order
creating it, which is herein given in full because of many points
of interest which are contained in the text and form of the decree,
and which can not be well illustrated otherwise:


    Superior Civil Government

    Office of the Deputy Superintendent of the Philippine Treasury

    CIRCULAR

    The Minister of War and Colonies communicated to this Superior
    Civil Government, on the 31st of July of last year, the following
    Royal order:

    Your Excellency: The Queen (whom God protect) has been pleased
    to issue the following Royal decree: Pursuant to the reasons laid
    before me by the Minister of War and Colonies, and in accordance
    with the opinion of the Council of Ministers, I hereby decree
    the following:

    Article I. A politico-military Government is hereby established
    for the island of Mindanao and adjacent islands.

    Article II. The Government of Mindanao shall be divided into six
    districts: 1. the Zamboanga District, formed of that part of the
    province of the same name which includes all of Sibugay Bay,
    and the west coast of the island as far as Murciélagos Point;
    2. the District of the North, including, in the northern part of
    the island, all the territory between the boundary line of the 1st
    District and Dapitan Point, on Tutwan Bay; 3. the Eastern District,
    between Dapitan Point, and Karaga Bay; 4. the Davao District,
    beginning on the boundary line of the 3d District and including
    the Bay of Davao and all the southern extremity of the island;
    5. the Central District, including Illana Bay, situated between the
    1st and 4th districts; 6. the District of Basilan, comprising the
    Spanish possessions in the Archipelagoes of Sulu and Basilan. The
    capital of the Government shall be in the Central District,
    the most advantageous place at the mouth of the Mindanao River
    being chosen. These districts shall be divided into two classes;
    to the first class shall belong the Northern, Central and Eastern
    districts, and to the second those of Zamboanga, Davao and Basilan.

    Article III. The Governor of Mindanao shall receive 6,000 pesos
    as salary, and 2,000 pesos as entertainment fund. The latter
    shall be supplied from the revenues from Government real estate
    and licenses. The Governor's residence shall also be supplied by
    the State.

    Article IV. This Governorship shall correspond to the class of
    brigadier generals; but the first Governor appointed may be a
    colonel, who will be entitled, as a reward, to an appointment as
    brigadier general after three years.

    Article V. The Governor of Mindanao shall be succeeded in
    his command by the officer of the highest rank in the island,
    pending the appointment of another Governor, or such action
    as the Captain General may deem advisable. In the districts,
    the Governor shall be succeeded by the officer next in rank,
    until the Governor of Mindanao appoints an Acting Governor and
    requests the Captain General to take such action as may be called
    for by the regulations in force.

    Article VI. The duties and powers of the Captain General in
    regard to the Government of Mindanao, and those of the Governor of
    the island, shall be the same as those provided for the Bisayas
    in my Royal decree of this date. As military authorities, they
    shall observe the usual relations between Captains General and
    Commanders General of Provinces. The Governor of Mindanao shall
    forward each month to the Captain General of the Philippines a
    tabulated record of the resolutions taken by him in the exercise
    of his authority, so that the latter may be able to exercise with
    efficiency the general supervision to which he is entitled. The
    Captain General shall forward to the Supreme Government, through
    the proper channels, both this tabulated record, and a statement
    of the action he has taken in the premises.

    Article VII. The districts of the first class shall be governed by
    lieutenant-colonels and those of the second class by senior majors.

    Article VIII. The duties of these district governors shall be
    those specified, up to the present time, for the politico-military
    Governors of the island.

    Article IX. The Governor of Mindanao shall have a Secretariate
    with the following personnel: a Secretary at 2,500 pesos per year;
    one clerk, class one, at 1,200; one clerk, class two, at 1,000,
    and one clerk, class three, at 800. 1,000 pesos are furthermore
    provided for the salaries of copyists, and 500 for office supplies.

    Article X. There is hereby created for Mindanao a Revenue Office
    which shall serve as depositary of the revenues, and shall have
    charge of collecting all taxes, and of the administration of the
    Army. It shall have the following personnel: an Administrator at
    2,500 pesos; a Controller at 2,000; one clerk, class one, at 1,000;
    two clerks, class two, at 800, and a cashier at 800. 1,500 pesos
    are provided for the salaries of copyists and other auxiliary
    employees, and 600 for office supplies.

    Article XI. The chiefs of districts shall remain in charge of
    the collection of taxes in the manner hitherto established, and
    shall be entitled to the allowances provided for that purpose. The
    provisions of this article shall not interfere with those already
    made for the departments of the administration which exist at
    the present time in Mindanao and their dependencies.

    Article XII. For expediting their official business the district
    governors shall have a secretary at a salary of 800 pesos in
    districts of the first class, and 600 in those of the second
    class. To each secretary's office 75 pesos are assigned for office
    supplies, and 150 for a copyist.

    Article XIII. The mission of the Jesuits, which has already been
    sent to Mindanao, shall look after the spiritual wants of the
    island, and Jesuits shall take the place of the other priests as
    soon as the mission has a sufficient personnel, and in the manner
    which may be deemed most convenient.

    Article XIV. The first and principal object of the mission shall
    be to secure the conversion of the races which have not yet been
    subjected, and even after the parishes of the island are provided
    for it shall maintain a sufficient number of missionaries for
    that purpose; each missionary shall be aided to the extent of
    800 pesos a year from the Royal Treasury.

    Article XV. The War and Navy Departments, together with the
    Colonial Office, shall decide what forces of the army and navy are
    required for Mindanao; the Captain-General shall have authority
    to make such changes as the circumstances may require, but he
    shall always report such changes to the respective Ministers
    for approval.

    Article XVI. The Governor can use the naval forces whenever he
    finds it necessary, with the assent of the commanding officer
    thereof.

    Article XVII. It shall be the constant duty of the army to explore
    and to occupy the country; for that purpose, two columns at least
    shall be detached each year from each district, and go through
    said districts in different directions. The chiefs of these columns
    shall make out a report about the territory reconnoitered by them;
    said reports shall be included in a general report made by the
    Governor, which shall be forwarded to the Department of War and
    Colonies through the Captain-General of the Philippines; this
    information will allow the Governor to give, in the following
    years his instructions to the columns sent out to explore the
    country, without losing sight of the advantage of establishing
    friendly relations with the tribes which inhabit the island, and
    the necessity of maintaining communication between the different
    districts. These columns shall be provided with everything that may
    be required to overcome the obstacles they will find on their way;
    and during the expedition, officers and soldiers shall receive
    field rations, issued in kind, according to the advice of the
    Military Health Department. For this purpose 10,000 pesos shall
    be carried on the budget for the first year, and 100 pesos shall
    be given for each expedition to the officer commanding a column,
    for extraordinary expenses.

    Article XVIII. Two special agents shall be appointed by the
    government for the purpose of studying means of developing all
    the natural resources of the island of Mindanao.

    Article XIX. In order to encourage colonists to settle in such
    parts of the island as may be deemed best, they will be furnished,
    at their request, the tools and implements required for their
    work or trade. The Governor is furthermore authorized to pay
    the traveling expenses of colonists who may wish to settle in
    the island without exceeding the sum hereinafter provided, the
    expenditure of which shall be duly accounted for. The new settlers
    shall be entitled to the foregoing privileges for ten years,
    and 12,000 pesos shall be appropriated for that purpose during
    the first year, from the revenues accruing from government real
    estate and licenses. The new settlers shall be exempt from tribute;
    the same favor shall be granted all tribes that submit peacefully.

    Article XX. The laws and regulations in force in the other islands
    of the Philippines shall be observed in all the offices of the
    Treasury Department. The prohibitions mentioned in the tariff
    shall apply to the custom house of Zamboanga; articles imported
    into the island in Spanish bottoms, and for local consumption,
    shall pay, during the next ten years, 2 per cent ad valorem, if
    of Spanish origin and 5 per cent if of foreign origin. If brought
    under a foreign flag said articles shall pay double the amounts
    specified above. If, after importing an article for use in the
    island, it is reëxported to some other Spanish island, it shall
    pay, on arrival at the latter the difference between what has been
    paid in Mindanao and the regular duty established in the tariff.

    Article XXI. Lands now under cultivation, and those placed under
    cultivation during the next ten years, shall pay no other impost
    than that required by the regulations now in force, per quiñon
    of land, as an acknowledgment of ownership. [216]

    Article XXII. The Government shall always have on hand a reserve
    fund of 10,000 pesos to meet any urgent and unexpected need
    that may arise; in such cases only, the Governor shall assume
    the responsibility of using this sum, or part of the same, and
    shall account for the expenditure, in the usual manner.

    Article XXIII. A sum of 3,000 pesos per year is placed at the
    disposal of the Governor for presents to the independent tribes,
    for the purpose of gaining their friendship; the same amount
    is assigned to the mission of the Jesuits. These funds shall be
    expended and accounted for in the best possible form.

    Article XXIV. For the expenses of installation a special estimate
    shall be drawn up, and action shall be taken thereon as provided
    by the laws for urgent cases.

    Article XXV. No extra pay or allowances of any kind shall be
    given except such as are provided in the present decree, and the
    per diems usually granted military engineers when they are sent
    out on official business.

    Article XXVI. The War, Navy, and Colonies Departments shall execute
    the present Decree in the parts which respectively concern them,
    and shall work in common for the execution of such parts thereof
    as may belong to two or more Departments.

    Article XXVII. So many of the laws and orders in force as are
    inconsistent with the provisions of the present decree are hereby
    repealed.

    Given at San Ildefonso on the 30th of July, 1860.

    Rubric of Her Majesty.--The Minister of War and Colonies. Leopoldo
    O'Donnell.--Communicated to you by Royal order for your information
    and action.


Sultan Pulalun was regarded by the Sulus as an able administrator
and a just ruler. His influence and fame and that of his father
endeared the house of Jamalul Kiram to the people to such an extent
as to restrict the succession of the sultanate to their direct line
of descent for a considerable period of time. Following the steps of
his father, he published a revised code of Sulu laws and conducted
the affairs of his government with care. Pulalun died September 24,
1862, and was followed by his son, Jamalul A`lam.

The succession of Jamalul A`lam was contested by Datu Jamalul Kiram,
the grandson of Sultan Shakirul Lah. The wife of Datu Jamalul
Kiram was the daughter of Datu Daniel Amil Bahar, and the latter
was inclined to support his son-in-law. Jamalul A`lam, however, had
the majority of the council of the datus on his side, and a Spanish
commission sent to Jolo in November, confirmed his sultanate. Espina
states that at that time the sultan was living with Datu Asibi, and
that the portrait of Queen Isabel II was placed before the sultan
when he made his declaration before the commission to recognize the
authority and sovereignty of Spain over all the dominions of Sulu,
including her dependencies in Borneo.

It is noted in the Sulu Annals, under date of February 1, 1867, that
a Spanish war vessel arrived at Jolo and demanded the punishment and
delivery of three men, one of whom was called Imam Mindang. The sultan
arrested all these men and had them executed on February 9 in the
presence of the officer in command of the vessel. It appears that in
spite of the vigilance of the Spanish navy, piratical expeditions were
kept up by discontented Moros not fully submissive to the sultan. This
led to further activity on the part of Spanish gunboats, and war was
consequently carried into Sulu waters and territory.

Another note in the Sulu Annals, under date of March 5, 1872, states
that 13 Spanish vessels attacked Jolo, killed 3 men and 1 woman
and lost 2 officers and 100 soldiers. That same year the famous
warrior Datu Daniel Amil Bahar died; and Puerta Princesa, capital
of Palawan, was garrisoned by native troops. A naval blockade of
Jolo was established and hostilities between Sulu and Spain were
resumed. In 1873-1875 considerable damage was done by the fleet
throughout the Archipelago, and two German vessels were seized while
carrying contraband of war to the Sulus.

In the estimation of the Sulus, Jamalul A'lam was one of their best
rulers. He carried out many public improvements, built roads and
bridges and mosques, enforced public attendance at the Friday church
services, and executed the laws with justice and force. He was as
able a ruler as any sultan Sulu had since the days of Abu Bakr,
but the vicissitudes of fortune were certainty against him. Before
his reign ended, Spain's hand fell upon him strong and heavy, his
capital was wrested from him, and his power waned.