CHAPTER VI

CONCLUSION


POLITICAL STATUS OF SULU AT THE TIME OF SPANISH EVACUATION

The cause for which Governor Arolas shed the blood of several
hundred Spanish soldiers and killed some thousands of Moros was
utterly defeated. The tenacity with which the Sulus resisted Spanish
domination, their obdurate opposition and bravery in battle, and their
obstinate passive resistance in peace, baffled all Spanish efforts
to subvert their political organization or gain a single point of
advantage without paying too dearly for it. The Sulus succeeded at
last in inaugurating their candidate as Sultan of Sulu. Their laws
and the administration of their internal affairs were not interfered
with. Their religion, social conditions, national usages and customs
were unaffected by any change whatsoever. Spanish influence and
jurisdiction did not extend beyond the limits of the garrison and no
material reform or progress reached the Moro community through that
channel. No effort was made by Spain to educate the Sulus and no
adequate measure was proposed by her governors which was applicable
to the needs of the Sulus and acceptable to their ideas. The Sulus
felt that there was a strong inclination on the part of the Spanish
Government or some of its recognized agents to change their religion
and destroy their national unity, and consequently they never had
complete confidence in Spanish officers and representatives and
repulsed every influence that tended to establish close relations
between them and the Christians of the Spanish garrison.

No tax or tribute was collected from the Sulus, and their territory was
exempted from the operation of the laws of the Philippine Islands. Sulu
imports could come in Sulu craft free of duty and unhampered by any
vexatious regulation. Duties could be collected by Sulus at all ports
unoccupied by Spain; and if hostilities could have been brought to an
end, the Sulus, in their pursuit of the peaceful vocations of life,
might have felt no appreciable difficulty or inconvenience from
Spanish occupation of Jolo, except the loss of the revenues of the
ports of Jolo and Siasi and some control over the trade of the Chinese.

Slavery remained an established institution of the land and its
continued practice among the Moros was neither denounced nor
restricted. The pearl industry remained in the hands of the Sulus
and pearl fishers and shell dealers paid a variable tax to the sultan
and local chiefs. Piracy was completely suppressed, and the invasion
of Christian communities and the capture of Christians as slaves by
Sulus terminated at the conquest of Jolo in 1876.

Before the campaign of 1876 the sultan ruled with a strong hand, lived
in state, was prosperous and had considerable wealth. The principal
datus lived at Jolo, and the Sulu forces were united. Jamalul A`lam
remained rich until his death, but subsequent wars and licentiousness
reduced the estate of his sons. The separation and dispersion of the
datus, however, weakened the Sulus more than any other cause. Each datu
began to feel more or less independent of the other, their jealousies
increased and became more intense and effectual; their forces were
disunited, and each chief relied solely upon his own fortifications and
following. United action was ignored or became impracticable. Soon the
subordinate chiefs began to feel their importance, gradually asserted
their rights, and assumed greater dignity and power in proportion to
their prosperity and the following they could command. Jamalul A`lam
ruled firmly, had every chief under his control, and held the state
intact. Three chiefs outside of his house were sufficient to sign the
treaty he made with Spain. These were Datu Harun, Datu Raja Lawut
Zaynul `Abidin (Asibi), the father of Datus Kalbi and Julkarnayn,
and Datu Muluk Bandarasa Pula, the son of the famous Datu Daniel,
and the father of the present Datu Pula-pula of Mubu or Tandu. No
maharajas or hadjis figured prominently in those days, and the
panglimas served as state messengers.

As soon as it became known that Jamalul A`lam was dying a condition
bordering on anarchy arose and disorder prevailed as in the days of
Badarud Din. Things grew worse during the regency of Datu Aliyud
Din, and worse still during the civil strife between the latter
and Raja Muda Amirul Kiram. General Arolas and Sultan Harun had to
fight every chief in his turn and every island by itself. Each chief
felt independent of the rest of the country and had his own ideas
as to who should be appointed sultan. Each datu was defended by
his own men only and each had to meet the Spanish forces by himself
unaided. Even Maymbung had to face the mighty foe with forces which
could be assembled from the immediate neighborhood only. Small
detachments did sometimes reënforce the forts of their neighbors,
but the proportion of help so extended to the actual strength of
the forces that could have been united was so insignificant that no
account can be taken of such coöperation.

Thus the total or combined strength of Sulu was reduced to small,
insignificant and disunited entities; the power of resistance
to outside invasion was diminished, but at the same time the
susceptibility of the country to foreign influence became nil. It
was an easy matter for General Arolas to defeat one party or chief
alone, but the necessity of fighting each chief by himself defeated
his purpose and efforts in the end. Unconsciously, Spain brought
on an abnormal condition of affairs in Sulu, extremely difficult to
manage and for which she never found the proper remedy. The ruling
sultan, though well supported by the greater mass of the people,
had neither the knowledge, the tact, nor the strength necessary to
correct the wrong done, and things in general tended rather to the
worse than to the better. The parties created by the civil strife of
1884 existed in 1899 with very little change, and their enmity had
become deeply rooted and ineradicable. The whole northern portion
of the island east of Jolo and eastern Tandu represented a distinct
party unfavorable to Jamalul Kiram II and at times seemed to be
wholly under the leadership of the two brothers, Datus Kalbi and
Julkarnayn. Similar parties existed in Tapul, Lugus, Siasi, and the
Tawi-tawi Group, many settlements having two chiefs, one representing
the sultan and the other the hostile party. To add evil to existing
wrong, the chiefs took advantage of this condition and vacillated in
their alliance from one party to another as it seemed to them more
advantageous for the time being. General Arolas fought both parties,
incurred the bitter enmity of all chiefs and gained for himself and
the cause of prosperity no advantage whatsoever. All the Sulus hated
Spain at heart and welcomed the end of her sovereignty, with the hope
of having more peace and better relations with her successor.


SPANISH POLICY


ATTITUDE OF THE MOROS

The vivid picture presented by the history of Sulu thrills the reader
with scenes of horror, cruelty, and misdirected energies. On one page
we read of how a rich and mighty sovereign stretched his hand across
the border of his domain into the territory of his weak neighbor and
coveted his jewels and treasure, and, being refused, struck terror,
desolation, and destruction in the home of the latter. On another
page we read how, as if possessed by a mighty demon, that weak and
petty king-neighbor summoned the powers of the wind and sea to his aid,
marched upon his strong enemy in the night, assailed him while unaware,
robbed his house, and carried his people away to work for his homely
sustenance. The mighty sovereign wakens in the morning, and in his
rage curses his wretched neighbor and swears vengeance upon him and
his wicked fellow nomads of the sea, but the rich and mighty lord of
the north has enemies and rivals in the west and far south and does
not dare leave his home unguarded. Part of his available warriors
he thought would be sufficient, and their valor and patriotism were
counted on as an additional asset and a sure guaranty of victory. The
sails of a gigantic fleet were unfurled and chariots and steeds were
provided for the triumphal march into the enemy's pearl land. But
the mighty sea rolled and the furious winds blew and the giant did
not prove a match for the weak, for man can not go against nature,
and valor is a poor aid against overwhelming odds. Yet some men's
hearts are made of stone and one or two experiences do not teach them
enough; so we see the same scene repeated time and time again, until
an opportune moment arrived and a new chapter was opened in which we
find the rich sovereign richer and mightier. This time nature takes
sides with might and turns the scales against the weak and petty king
of the south and leaves him wrecked and stranded on his coral reefs.

The Sulu is a Malayan of prominent type, reared in his infancy
by a Brahman priest and brought up to maturity under the care of a
Mohammedan instructor. He rejected his idols as early as 1450 and had
been for more than a century prior to the arrival of Legaspi at Cebu,
a faithful and devoted worshipper of "Allahu Ta'ala," the Almighty and
only God, according to the teaching of the prophet Mohammed and the
holy Quran. He had laws, an established government, an organized state,
an alphabet, and a system of education. By trade he was a planter and
fisher, and both land and sea yielded him plenty. He turned the timber
of his rich forests into boats and utilized the currents of the sea
and the movements of the wind. Navigation came natural to him, and he
sailed to distant lands and traded his pearls for silks and spices. He
had a wide range of experience, and his knowledge of the world was by
no means restricted to one island or to one limited group of islands.

The dominion of the Sultan of Sulu was complete and his power was
well respected throughout the Archipelago. Between Mindanao and
Borneo 150,000 people--Yakans, Samals, and Sulus--lived and obeyed
one man. True, the Sulus had no standing army or navy, but they had
innumerable boats, forts, and firearms, and every able-bodied man was
a soldier and a sailor, always armed, and always ready for a call to
arms. His immediate neighbors were pagans, or "infidels," who paid
him homage and tribute. He was the master of the land and the lord
of the southern seas. He was chivalrous in his manners and received
his friends with liberal hospitality; but he wasted no sympathy or
kindness on his enemy. The enemy of the state was also an enemy to
"Allahu Ta'ala," and no life was deemed too dear to sacrifice for
the cause of home and God. It was the idea of his home that started
the blood rushing through his veins, and religion fittingly fanned
the flame and heated his blood to the boiling point. There is honor
even among thieves, and a nation made up of fierce pirates need not
go begging for dignity, gallantry, and self-pride. Let the Sulu be
idolatrous or a fire worshiper and he will "go juramentado" on the
strength of his faith in wooden or fire gods before he yields to a
master or serves as a slave. He will die before he surrenders. Such
metal is what makes the Sulus brave, independent, and unyielding.

The Sulus watched the progress of Legaspi at Cebu, Panay, and Luzon,
saw how the pagan chiefs were subjugated, and witnessed the expulsion
of their brother Mohammedans from Manila. They had played this rôle
themselves, and when the enemy reached their shores they needed no
word of explanation or stimulus to resist, except that which they had
in their breeding and general make-up. Spain instigated hostilities
and coveted their domain; it was not their part to yield, but it was
Spain's clear duty to reëstablish peace before the evils resulting from
war outweighed the good obtained. This she failed to do, and the Sulus
were invaded repeatedly and harassed constantly. Bitter animosity
filled the hearts of the Sulus, and a desire for revenge prompted
them to retaliate; and what can be expected from people of their race
and civilization except cruelty and barbarity in war! We know that
"war is hell" among highly civilized nations and why should we expect
of the Sulus a moral conduct out of proportion to their intellectual
development and the influences of their civilization and religion? The
life of an "infidel" was not a matter of religious concern to them
at all. The Prophet himself led his people against nonconformists and
promised them reward instead of pardon or intercession before God. The
Quran taught them that patriotism is a part of their religion,
and love of home and family left no place for cowardice and no
patience with humiliation. They therefore fought well and fought
cruelly. They raided the enemy's country, robbed him, and carried
away many slaves. Slavery was also sanctioned by their religion and
formed an established custom or method of punishment which took the
place of imprisonment and saved the expense of jails and guards.

Humanity called for different action on both sides; but it evidently
made no impression on the Sulus. Not satisfied with just measures of
war and direct retaliation, they developed an abnormal propensity for
piracy, invaded the Spanish domain frequently for the procurement
of slaves and for other wicked purposes, and committed unspeakable
horrors and atrocities. But to treat evil with evil adds no virtue
to the credit of the other side. We rarely read of wounded Moros
after an engagement, and, strange to say, all wounds of Moros were
invariably immediately fatal. If few Moros were ever kindly treated
after battle, certainly many more were promptly dispatched in a manner
that terminated suffering and life at the same time.


MISTAKES AND DIFFICULTIES OF SPANISH RULE

Had Spain exerted more effort to increase the Jolo garrison in
1646 and trusted the charge of this garrison to an able and upright
administrator, the fruits of the brilliant conquest of General Corcuera
would not have been lost, and in all probability the trouble with
Sulu would have been ended before the termination of the seventeenth
century. However, instead of this course, weak characters were charged
with the management of affairs, and in place of permanent and strong
occupation of the land an insignificant treaty was made with the Sulus
with no intention on the part of Spain of keeping it permanently and
with no hope that it would be kept by the Sulus. Similar mistakes
were frequently repeated and a cruel inhuman strife marked with an
astounding profuseness of bloodshed and terrible loss of life and
evil of all sorts, was prolonged for the space of three hundred and
twenty years without any advantage that is worth considering.

In consequence of all this, the Sulu has been pictured to the outside
world as a black devil incarnate, borne in mischief and conceived
in iniquity; without a human characteristic, barbarous and savage as
his second cousin the orang-utan of Borneo. The Sulu had no means or
chance of pleading his cause before an international court, and his
cry could not be heard or registered by a foreign hand or press. He
was not met except with a predetermination to fight him. He was not
approached except with the intention of sharing his treasure. He
was not invited except to surrender his right of government and no
alternative was offered him except tribute or death. It is out of
reason to expect such people to abandon their customs, traditions,
government, and religion without a struggle. It is out of reason to
expect them to yield to threats and be daunted by a bombshell shot from
a distance. The jungle is thick and extensive, their boats and sails
are ready and light; they know the routes of the sea and can follow
the currents of the ocean in the dark as well as in the light. The
coasts of Borneo and the Celebes are not too far from them, and living
there is as cheap and easy as at home. It is beyond reason to expect
that all sultans, datus, and panglimas will resign their offices,
give up their rank and privileges, and be content to plant corn on
the hillside or catch fish along the beach. The laws of nature are
not ambiguous, and man is man whether his skin is white or brown.

The chief difficulties Spain had to contend with in the south arose
out of the natural weakness of her system of administration. Her
Governors-General changed frequently. The Moro question received
a secondary attention, and no definite policy or settled course
of action was ever systematically worked out and followed. What
Corcuera planned was not carried out by his successors, and measures
which were approved by General Terrero were disapproved by General
Weyler and ignored by General Blanco. Had Governor-General Urbiztondo
preceded Governor-General Claveria, Jolo might have been attacked and
conquered before 1851, and had Governor-General Malcampo preceded
Governor-General Urbiztondo, the garrison of Jolo might have been
established twenty-five years earlier.

The policy of Governor Parrado was not followed by Governor Arolas,
and the plans and pledges of the latter were not fully respected
by his successors. Treaties were made to be broken rather than
to be obeyed, and at the end of three hundred and twenty years of
protracted relations with Sulu, no satisfactory policy can be said to
have been decided upon at either Madrid or Manila. The treaty of 1878
was a temporary expedient. It was not intended to express a policy
nor did Spain intend to restrict her influence to the provisions of
a treaty nor to tie her hands so fast for any length of time. Spain
was intent on the complete conquest of Sulu, the assimilation of all
the Moro tribes, and the unification of government, religion, and
civilization throughout the Philippine Archipelago. This ideal was
the hope of all governors of Sulu and formed a concealed motive that
prompted their actions and guided their administration. The governors
of Sulu differed only in their ideas as to the length of time which
should pass before the Sulus should be denied their autonomy, and the
methods by which the change could be best brought around. There were
opportune and inopportune times to interfere, which were left for the
Governor-General to decide, and in the majority of cases his decision
was controlled not by the immediate needs of the occasion, but by
interests pertaining to the general administration of the Archipelago,
which left partial attention and inadequate means available for the
solution of the vexatious difficulties in the south. Generals who
were anxious to distinguish themselves, took the first opportunity
that offered itself, but satisfied themselves with the immediate
results of victory or the simple correction of the wrong calling
for military action, without bearing in mind the general situation
and the requirements of the next step that should be undertaken as
part of a course planned for the carrying out of a settled general
policy. Thus bound to observe the general provisions of the treaty
of 1878, and limited in the authority granted them from Manila and in
the strength of the garrison assigned to Jolo, the governors of Sulu
felt their hands completely tied, and consequently they could not
accomplish much and left matters to drift with the current of events.

During the governorship of General Terrero, Governor Arolas was
given a free hand and sufficient troops to carry out his plan; but
Arolas was not much more than a fighting man and an excellent post
commander, and the evils of his strenuous measures outweighed the good
he accomplished; and when the Jolo garrison was subsequently reduced
by Governor-General Weyler his policy could not be continued and was
necessarily doomed to utter failure.

However, nobody was quicker to note such mistakes and to observe the
needs of the situation than the Spanish officers themselves, especially
inspectors-general who were commissioned to investigate matters and
conditions in Sulu, and historians who made a study of Sulu affairs.


REPORT OF BALTASAR GIRAUDIER

Of works of this nature we give brief accounts of the estimable
report of Baltasar Giraudier, Director of the "Diario de Manila,"
which was presented to the Governor-General, Domingo Moriones, in
1880, and the noteworthy remarks and recommendations of the author of
"Apuntes sobre Jolo," Miguel A. Espina, colonel of infantry.

Baltasar Giraudier accompanied General Malcampo to Jolo in 1876 and
made special inquiry into the situation in the south. He clearly
stated that the terms of the treaty of 1851 could not be carried out
(to advantage). Failure to observe this treaty provoked the sultan and
Sulus to impatience, resistance, and a rebellious attitude. Referring
to the Jolo campaign of 1876 he estimated the strength of the attacking
army at approximately 11,000 troops, and described Jolo as an actual
churchyard, held in a constant state of siege, and a great cost
to the nation in men and money. Naked facts, he asserted, did not
justify former expeditions, and hostilities were often provoked for
ulterior motives. Considerable harm resulted from such misdirected
measures, while much good to both nations could have been derived from
a policy of attraction, frank, loyal, and disinterested. He called the
attention of the authorities to the necessity of a faithful observance
of the terms of treaties, in order to expect and demand with right
and respect a reciprocal observance of such treaties by the Moros;
to the advisability of honoring and strengthening the authority
of the sultan in order to secure his good will and coöperation in
maintaining peace and harmony and in repressing the evil tendencies
of rebellious datus and subchiefs; to the great advantages that may
arise from reëstablishing the salary of the sultan and promoting
those friendly relations which tend to strengthen the Sulu alliance
and render this state a stronghold and a protecting wall against
invasion from foreign countries. He condemned the treaty of 1878 as
limiting the government's freedom of action and checking the progress
and success of the nation's policy.

He reiterated that there is great need and necessity of defining
the policy of the nation relative to Sulu and the Moro country in
general. Such a grave question should be settled on a firm basis
and should not be subject to the caprice of an individual governor
or commander of a war vessel. No opportunity should be allowed for
ignorance, malice, false pretexts, and ulterior motives that defame
the national honor, weaken the policy of the government, or work to
the detriment of the people and the country. He pointed to several
incidents of wrong conduct or imprudence on the part of officials which
provoked trouble and war and left on the Moros an impression that the
Spaniards were acting deceitfully and in bad faith. The general policy
he outlined for the information of the government and for the uniform
conduct of all officials was submitted in the form of recommendations,
the most important of which are briefly noted as follows:


    1. The sultan and datus should be treated with respect and
    consideration.

    2. Immediate justice and impartiality should be strictly
    administered and practiced in all cases and under all conditions,
    especially when crime or outrage is committed against the Moros;
    for such action would demonstrate in an impressive manner an
    upright conduct which would command the fullest respect of the
    Moros and obedience to law and order.

    3. It is of the utmost importance that the belief, temples,
    and cemeteries of the people be respected.

    4. The speedy punishment of all Moro misconduct and aggression
    should be secured through the datu or chief.

    5. The fleet should make frequent visits to various islands to
    familiarize the people with the flag, to map the country, and to
    study conditions in general.

    6. Religion should be fully tolerated in the same manner as in
    India and Java. Proselytism should be prohibited.

    7. The sultan should be invited to live in Jolo; an edifice
    should be constructed for his residence which would increase his
    dignity in the eyes of his people; and he should be given a high
    office in connection with the government (as secretary) which
    would engender and promote his interest in the government and
    its welfare and secure needed and desirable coöperation between
    officers and chiefs.


In conclusion, Giraudier pointed to the wisdom of English and Dutch
policy in affording education to the sons of native princes and
chiefs at public expense, to the necessity of large sacrifices at
the beginning which would be amply compensated for by a general
pacification of the Archipelago in the end.


VIEWS OF ESPINA

Colonel Espina assumed that retrogression was out of the question
and that the flag which was waving over Sulu must be defended and
supported. Sulu could not be abandoned to her fate and Spanish
sovereignty had inevitably to be exercised. Extermination of Moros
he held to be absurd and impossible, and measures so directed he
regarded as injurious and unwise. He entertained strong hopes,
amounting to actual conviction, that Moros could become Spanish in
political organization, sympathy, and civilization, and that their
religion did not form an obstacle to their reformation and assimilation
unless conversion into the Christian religion was insisted upon and
rigorously kept up. He thought that the cause of religion alone was
sufficient to prolong the war indefinitely and lead the Government to
a policy of extermination and failure. Instead of that he advised a
prudent and tolerant policy declaring absolute noninterference with
religion and hearty coöperation with the Sulus in matters of general
concern and public welfare. He considered it of great importance to
occupy all the principal islands of the Archipelago with garrisons
and to establish colonies and agricultural stations at the most
desirable localities and harbors. He wrote at considerable length
on the organization of a rural police force to maintain order and
carry out the various measures of his policy. He pointed out the
advisability of strengthening the authority of the sultan over Sulus,
of rendering his appointment subject to the approval or choice of the
Spanish Government, and of selecting a council of state loyal to the
Spanish Government and serving under salary. The chief features of
the policy he outlined are as follows:


    1. The organization of the sultanate should be made or continued
    in accordance with the laws and customs of the country, but in a
    manner agreeable to the interests of the Spanish Government. Rank,
    order, and religion should not be interfered with.

    2. The sultan and members of the council of state should be
    appointed by the Governor-General and should have salaries.

    3. A new treaty should be made in order to rectify those clauses
    of the treaty of 1878 pertaining to the maintenance of peace and
    the guarantee of safety of life and property.

    4. Slavery should be abolished, radically and thoroughly.

    5. Compulsory tribunals of justice or courts should be established
    to relieve datus and chiefs of the exercise of such functions.

    6. Commerce should be encouraged and rendered free for all boats
    for a period of twenty-five years.

    7. Roads should be constructed to facilitate communication and
    transportation from the central region of the island to its
    principal harbors.

    8. Agriculture should be developed and colonies encouraged.

    9. Necessities should be created for the Moros, providing them
    at the same time with means for satisfying them. Children of the
    sultan and datus should be educated in Manila, and schools for
    the Moro dialect should be established and made accessible to
    the public.


PURPOSE OF SPAIN

A few closing remarks on the purpose and interests of Spain in Sulu and
the resources she had available for carrying out this purpose may not
be out of place in order to give the reader a clear idea of the final
policy which Spain had for Sulu and to enable him to grasp the scope,
complexity, and difficulties of this problem. However, in discussing
these subjects and the changes they were intended to bring about it
must be remembered that every project on the part of the sovereign
nation or Spain calls for consideration from two points of view--the
first is whether the agency employed was sufficient and adequate
to impose the change and carry it through; the second is the amount
of resistance such a project encountered on the part of the subject
nation or Sulu, and in case the resistance could be overcome, whether
or not a nation like that of the Sulus was developed sufficiently
for the requirements of the change and for subsequent adaptation to
the system it was proposed to inaugurate.

Inasmuch as the treaty of 1878 was not abrogated and no distinct
effort was actually made to disregard it, it should be regarded as the
official and most authentic expression of Spain's relation, rights,
and purpose in Sulu. The terms of this treaty gave Spain indisputable
sovereignty over Sulu, the right to occupy all necessary points and to
establish military garrisons wherever needed, the right to establish
custom-houses at occupied points, the right to limit or control the
importation of firearms, the right to suppress piracy and to demand
the Sultan's coöperation in its suppression.

The degree or amount of sovereignty Spain was to exercise over Sulu
was very indefinitely stated. The term "indisputable" does not signify
"complete," as some hasty reports on Moro affairs have expressed
it. The aim of the treaty was to exclude Great Britain, Germany, and
other foreign nations from the Spanish sphere of influence over Sulu,
and the word "indisputable" should be interpreted in this sense, which
is clearly expressed in the Sulu text of the treaty. At that time
there was no intention on the part of Spain to assume the control
of Sulu internal affairs and the Sulus endeavored to guard their
complete freedom and right to continue their political organization,
laws, and religion by specifying those powers which Spain had a right
to exercise over them and by declaring emphatically that all their
customs, usages, and religion should not be changed. The Sulu word for
"customs" signifies laws, organization, and administrative methods. It
is the political not the social sense of the word about which they were
so very particular. The treaty did not entitle Spain to interference,
or to institute any measure that tended toward political change or
reform in Sulu. The sultan was left supreme in the exercise of his
authority over Moros. The treaty simply secured undisputed Spanish
control over Sulu's foreign relations and commerce and incorporated
Sulu into the Philippine Archipelago in this sense only. It further
established peace within the Archipelago by checking any possible
revival of Sulu piracy. It appears that both distinguished governors,
Martinez and Parrado, interpreted the treaty in this sense, and the
Sulus certainly so understood it.

Two important steps were taken by Spain later than 1878 in order to
modify the relations established by the treaty. The first of these
steps was a resolution to appoint the Sultan of Sulu or control the
succession to this office. This occurred in 1886 when Sultan Harun
was declared by the Spanish Government, in answer to the requests
of Governor-General Terrero and Governor Arolas, as the legitimate
sultan. By this act the Madrid Government asserted its right to a
degree of actual sovereignty over Sulu internal affairs and backed its
assertion with the necessary force and partially carried it through
at the hands of Governor Arolas. Jamalul Kiram II finally recognized,
to a certain extent, Spain's authority in this matter and accepted
her right of approval or confirmation of the election.

The second step was an attempt to exact tribute from the Sulus. This
was done by a decree issued in 1894 by Governor-General Blanco
directing that a census be taken of Sulu and a poll tax of 1 "real"
per capita be collected. Advantage was taken at that time of the strong
desire of Raja Muda Amirul Kiram to become sultan. Sultan Harun was
persuaded to resign, and the measure adopted for the collection of the
tribute resulted in the payment of a sum of money or its equivalent by
Amirul Kiram and the latter's appointment as sultan. The scheme was a
compromise by which Spain attempted to assume more control over Sulu,
and Amirul Kiram secured his appointment as sultan without having
to go to Manila for this purpose. However, the attempt to impose a
tribute on the Sulus appears to have failed completely. No census
was taken and no tribute was asked in later years.

The purpose of Spain, in accordance with her official declarations,
may therefore be summed up as follows: 1. Complete control of Sulu
foreign relations; 2. Complete control of Sulu commerce; 3. The right
to appoint the sultan; 4. The right to impose tribute on the Sulus.

The first two propositions were legitimate and proper. Both could be
accomplished and retained by virtue of Spain's naval power, merchant
marine, and friendly foreign relations with the European nations. The
Sulus had no navy and no steam vessels. Their native boats could not
offer any significant resistance and were powerless to oppose the
Spanish navy. Ever since 1844 the latter was in the ascendant and by
1870 it had completely overpowered the Sulu naval forces. Both these
propositions were conceded to Spain in the treaty of 1878 and were
justly held ever since. They strengthened the unity of the Philippine
Archipelago and secured strength and permanent internal peace.

The third proposition, the right to appoint the sultan, was in effect
defeated. It was poor policy. At the end of the bloody struggle that
arose because if it, Spain retained only the right to confirm the
choice of the nation. Had Governor Arolas confined himself to this
point he would have won without a contest and without engendering
hostility and ill feeling toward his Government. Had a test of arms
been the sole arbiter of the question Governor Arolas might be said
to have won his point completely, for his forces defeated those of the
Sulus in every encounter; but the tenacity of purpose, persistence, and
patriotism of the Sulus outlived his determination, and what was won by
force and cruelty was given up in the end as inadvisable and impolitic.

The fourth proposition fell through. The best argument that can be
advanced in its favor is that a tribute was actually paid by the
Sultan Jamalul Kiram II in 1894 and that the tax was not imposed in
later years because of the extensive campaign conducted in Mindanao
and the frequent changes of Governor-General, and also because of
the Tagalog insurrection of 1896. Such argument is more in the nature
of an apology than a defense. There is some significance in exacting
tribute from the Sultan of Sulu, but the principal of the tribute was
utterly defeated. The sultan evidently evaded the question entirely as
soon as he felt secure in his office. Such a measure would certainly
have been opposed by the Sulus. They would have risen to a man and
sacrificed more life and treasure in this cause than in the previous
one of the appointment of their candidate for the sultanate. The nation
was somewhat divided in the former case, but in the matter of resisting
the payment of a tribute there was not a dissenting vote. They would
have fought most vigorously and unitedly. Governor Arolas did not
exhaust their fighting powers; they could have fought just as well in
1888 as in 1886-87. One party alone advanced against Jolo in 1895,
and a band attacked landing soldiers in 1897. To pay tribute to a
foreign power meant vassalage in their opinion, and this they could
not tolerate. They would fight, not on the strength of a careful and
intelligent estimate of their power as compared to that of Spain,
but because they would not tolerate the idea and their national honor
would prompt them to exhaust their strength before they would yield
to such a humiliating proposition. Their fighting power was only
one unit of their national resources; their national independence,
national character, unity and stability of organization were other
units which added considerable strength to their resistance. What
they could not defeat they would have left alone; what they could
not tolerate they would have evaded; what they could not evade they
would have run away from.

An exaggerated degree of honor and self-pride, uncontrolled by
a certain degree of intelligence, culture, and moral courage, is
dangerous. Courage unencumbered by prosperity or wealth and spurred
by abnormal religious sentiment, becomes desperate, reckless, and
fanatical. Moreover the treatment by a highly civilized nation of
another limited in culture and development is under moral restrictions
similar to those pertaining to the treatment by a man of mature age of
a minor. A minor can not be blamed for lack of mature reason, and no
more can be expected of him than he is able to do. He must further be
treated with equity and justice, though he is weak and helpless. It
was impossible for the Sulus to change their character at once. It
was absurd to expect of them any action contrary to their natural
disposition and national character. It was the duty of the sovereign
nation to recognize the national character of her inferior and treat
her wisely and justly. Tact might have been mightier than an army
and wise measures might have worked wonders. Nations can be educated
and can develop like individuals and force is a poor agent where the
carrying out of a certain measure is intended to bring about reform.

Spain imposed tribute upon the Sulus without being prepared to enforce
its collection and before the Sulus were ready for such a measure
and the relation it involved. Granting that the funds derived from
the tax were to be used for the benefit of the Sulus the principle
underlying the institution of the tax is repugnant to the people and
no means were used to remedy this feeling or train the people for
its tolerance. No savage or semicivilized nation can be reformed and
governed without initial expense, nor can reform be effected in a day,
although forces and funds are available in plenty.


RESOURCES OF SPAIN

In their bearing on the subject under consideration the resources of
Spain may be divided into three divisions--her fighting power, her
government machinery or system of government, and her racial influence.

Her fighting power includes all the forces of the army and navy which
she could bring to bear on Sulu and her ability to support them. The
largest Spanish force that ever assembled on the soil of Sulu was
that commanded by Governor-General Malcampo in the expedition of 1876;
this was estimated at from 9,000 to 11,000 troops. In January, 1888,
the military forces of the Philippine Islands numbered 12,800 men,
of whom 1,400 were Spaniards and the rest natives. Governor Arolas
never commanded more than 2,000 troops in his various expeditions
and never needed more than that number. A garrison force of 700 men
proved sufficient to repulse a general attack on Jolo in 1881. We may
therefore safely conclude that a force of 2,000 native troops stationed
in Sulu was sufficient for all purposes and considerations. Such a
force should have been kept in Sulu all the time. The moral effect
of maintaining it would be to suppress any attempt at opposition
and to check the tendency to mischief or rebellion. The fact that
there is a ready force behind an order or request prompts obedience
and conformity, before deceit or plots can have time to grow. Wise
measures are more effective and peace is assured. Besides, the honor
of the sovereign power is constantly maintained and no chances for
disregard or dishonor are allowed. Force back of a wise administrator
is a potent factor for good. It need not be used except rarely and
when absolutely necessary. Force is evil only when it is allowed to
rule the head of the administrator and, like every other agency, it is
good only when it is wisely directed. It was therefore necessary and,
in as far as it was needed to back a competent administration, it
should have been provided. Spain could have easily kept such a force
in Sulu all of the time. She had the troops and the means to support
them. She, however, did not do this, and only part of the time did
the Sulu garrison have the required strength. However, the facility
of transporting troops from Zamboanga to Jolo and the preponderance
of her naval forces reduced this deficiency to a minimum and the
fighting power of Spain may, as far as our purpose is concerned,
be deemed to have been adequate to rule Sulu.

The chief weakness in the Spanish régime lay in her system of
government. Her government machinery proved ineffective and
inadequate. No competent men were educated into the needs of the
situation and given permanent charge of Sulu affairs. Temporary
military commanders were put in command without the necessary
preparation for the requirements of the office. No special ability was
needed to conduct an office already organized, to execute laws already
established, or to carry out a system of government already laid out;
but it required higher abilities to establish sovereignty over a
new state like Sulu, lay down a definite, settled, and wise policy,
and carry out the regeneration and reform of a nation. Besides too
frequent changes in the office of Governor-General, the governors of
Sulu were also allowed too short terms. More than thirteen governors
ruled Sulu in the course of twenty-three years, from 1876 to 1899. Not
one of these felt that it was his duty to institute a permanent policy
for Sulu, or believed that he was going to stay long enough to carry it
through, and that he was going to be held responsible for its conduct,
whether it failed or succeeded.

The government of a state is entitled to as much consideration as
any business undertaking and there is no reason why it should not
be conducted on sound and businesslike principles. Such methods as
characterized the government of Sulu would have ruined any business
establishment and could not have done justice to any nation or body
of men it represented. The men in responsible positions trusted the
transmission of all official actions and communications to interpreters
of limited capacity and strength of character. No governor could
speak Sulu and verify the translation of his letters and orders. His
knowledge of Sulu affairs and his ideas and opinions were necessarily
colored by the opinions or designs of his interpreters. The strength of
Spain's assertion and declaration of her rights to rule Sulu, exclude
foreign interests, appoint the Sultan of Sulu, and impose tribute
on the Sulus was based on the meaning of the word "sovereignty"
which does not appear at all in the Sulu text of the treaty of
1878. The Sulu copy of the treaty uses in this connection the word
"agad" which means "follow." In the translation of this document from
Sulu into English a point was stretched and "agad" was interpreted as
"obey." While the Sultans of Sulu felt that they were independent and
free in their administration of Sulu internal affairs, and that they
were only obliged to give Spain preference, and ally themselves on her
side when foreign nations interfered, governors like Arolas read the
word "sovereignty" in the Spanish text and tried to inforce its full
and actual sense. The Sulus felt that the Spanish governors were thus
transgressing the limits of their authority, and the Spanish governors
thought at the same time that the Sulus were unreliable and deceitful,
a most undesirable and unfortunate condition of affairs.

The missionaries in the northern islands acted differently. They talked
the language of the natives and performed their duties creditably
and with unquestionable success. They understood the people, knew
their real conditions, sympathized with them, and worked out their
religious regeneration admirably. The governors of Sulu did not take
any such view of their duties; they had some zeal, but they lacked that
understanding of human nature and the forces of regeneration that the
missionaries mastered. They had no idea of how a Sulu law or custom
could be modified and reformed, for they never acquainted themselves
sufficiently with the laws and customs of the people and never paid
much attention to the feelings and public opinion of the Sulus. They
trusted every measure to force and could not think of reform without
compulsion. A missionary who observed the intense fear of demons on the
part of some pagan Filipinos converted several of them by means of a
picture of hell and satan, and gradually taught them the principles
of Christianity. But the governors of Sulu could never detect any
relation between Sulu and Spanish laws and could never find a method of
approach from one side to the other. Their form of government failed to
adapt itself to the conditions of the country and could neither merge
into the Sulu organization nor adapt the Sulu organization to its
system. No sympathies bound the two races or the two organizations,
and no foundation for unification and subsequent assimilation could
be laid. Spanish jurisdiction remained within the garrison, and its
machinery could find no application outside the walls of Jolo.

The amount of force needed to reduce and reform Sulu varies in
accordance with the policy pursued. Considerable light can be thrown
on this subject by a study of the circumstances and causes which gave
rise to Datus Ayunan, Mandi, Piang, Ara, and Pedro Cuevas or Kalun.

Datu Ayunan lived at Taviran and was much lower in rank and influence
than either the Sultan of Bagumbayan or Datu Utu. Having grievances
against Datu Utu he shrewdly allied himself with the Spanish forces and
rendered them valuable assistance. In a short time he rose to power,
dignity, and fame and died greater in the estimation of the country
than his overlord, the Sultan of Bagumbayan.

Datu Piang married the daughter of Datu Ayunan and learned his
methods. As soon as Datu Utu's attitude toward him became unbearable
and hostile he offered his services to the Spanish authorities and won
their protection and support. By shrewd tactics he dispossessed his
former master Utu of his best lands, attracted most of his following
and caused his downfall. At the time of the Spanish evacuation he had
become the richest Moro in Mindanao and the most influential chief
in the island.

Datu Ara had Chinese blood in him. He married his daughter to the
Gugu [224] of Magindanao, won the favor of the governor of Kotabato,
and ruled over all Moros on the southern branch of the Mindanao River
below Tamontaka. He was strong and well respected.

Datu Mandi married the daughter of a Samal chief of Zamboanga and
through his tact and ability to speak Spanish established for himself
a respectable position over the Samals of Mindanao. He served the
interests of Spain faithfully and bore arms in her behalf against
Bisayans and Lanao Moros. The recognition and support he obtained from
the Spanish Government raised him to the rank of a datu and gave him
supremacy over all the chiefs of the peninsula of Zamboanga. A close
observation of Datu Mandi's ability and attitude toward the government
renders it clear that the influence this man could bring to bear on
his people was immense. It is no exaggeration to state that had his
influence been tactfully utilized, he could have easily, with the aid
of one company of Spanish troops, reduced to submission all Moros and
Subanuns living between Point Flechas and Sindangan on the outskirts
of Dapitan. There never existed a Moro chief more tactful, pliable,
forceful, and favorable to the reorganization of the Moro community
and its system of government along modern and civilized lines.

With little aid from the governor of Zamboanga, Pedro Cuevas made
himself the real lord of northern Basilan. His power was further well
respected throughout all the Basilan Group of islands. With no more
than two companies of troops at his disposal he could have acted as
the Spanish representative and subordinate ruler or governor of all
the Basilan and Balangingi Groups of islands and could have effected
any reform desired.

By tact and ability these men obtained Spanish influence and support
and rose from the lowest ranks of the people to positions of great
power and dignity. Had the Spanish Government employed such men to
further its influence by enlarging their following and extending
their territories and spheres of activity, there is no doubt that
a very significant step would have been taken which would have made
clear to the Spanish authorities successful methods of procedure and
new lines of policy that lead to success.

Similar lines of action could have been adopted in Sulu by taking
advantage of existing parties and factions. Once the sympathy of
one Sulu party was obtained and its forces bore arms on behalf of
or on the same side with Spain, the door would have been opened for
effective influence and wise measures directed along the line of
cleavage would have been bound to produce results. A minimum of force
would then be needed, and strained relations and discord would give
way to friendship and concord. The history of Sulu is not wanting
in proof that wise attractive methods have been more effective than
force and arbitrary rule, and, once we reflect upon Abu Bakr's rule
and the wonderful reformation he worked out, then we realize what
was and what was not a wise policy for Sulu.

Little attention has, as a rule, been given to race characteristics
as a potent factor in a nation's policy. The racial character of
the sovereign nation bears on the ruled nation in several ways--in
the conduct and demeanor of officials in their official and social
relations with the chiefs and common people, in the demeanor of
soldiers and civilians in their social intercourse with the mass of the
people, and in the industrial or business relations of the two nations.

The Sulu datus and chiefs are very courteous and polite and
are unusually keen to notice personal discourtesy. Impulsive and
unconciliatory methods are bitterly resented, and an abrupt manner
may in itself be sufficient to defeat any measure. The people in
general have no patience with an impetuous officer and hate to be
discourteously treated even by their datus. Treated with disrespect
by the authorities or disregarded by the ruling race, they become
exclusive, evasive, indifferent, unsympathetic, and discontented. The
ruling race can be polite, courteous, and civil in all its social
relations with those under it and yet retain its racial supremacy
and social position, and win the respect and submission of the ruled
race. If ordinary civil duties require good breeding and good manners,
the duties of the Spanish officer toward the native chiefs certainly
demanded the highest qualities of a gentleman and the most sympathetic,
upright, and firm disposition possible. Many Spanish officers possessed
these qualities and conducted their offices with full dignity and
credit, but it can not be said that all officers were so fully
qualified. Such facts in themselves are sufficient to determine the
quality of the person to whom state affairs in Sulu should be trusted.

Further, the reform of a nation can never be fully accomplished without
the aid of her chiefs and leaders. The coöperation of the natives is a
very potent factor for good, and a system of government which aims at
the elevation of a conquered nation must find a place in its machinery
for the activities of natives of ability and influence. Hence the
necessity of successful coöperation with natives and the importance
of securing higher qualifications in men holding the highest offices
of government. The fewer such officers are and the abler they are,
the better and safer the result will be. Such men can overcome racial
prejudices and national sentiments and grievances and by the manner in
which they discharge their duties, they can command the approval and
respect of the ruled nation, gain its sympathies to the side of the
government, and maintain peace, prosperity, and good relations between
the governing and the governed nations. However, these results were
not obtained by Spain in Sulu. The religion and racial prejudices of
the two nations were never overcome and the Sulus maintained a feeling
of revulsion and distrust toward Spaniards and Christian Filipinos.

Great aid is rendered the government when the ruling race is competent
and resourceful enough to utilize the services of the ruled race and
at the same time give it sufficient space and latitude for the exercise
of its energies and the satisfaction of its ambitions. A most favorable
industrial relation can be maintained, if the capital of the sovereign
nation can find opportunities to invest in the conquered territory,
buy up its crude products, and promote its natural resources. The
natives then find work to do, increase in prosperity, and look upon
the existence of the ruling race as favorable for their development
and progress, but in case the subjugated nation is crowded out of its
territories and robbed of its resources by keen competition, greed,
or undue domination on the part of the ruling race, hostilities are
bound to arise and disaffection extends from industrial relations to
politics and may lead to trouble and rebellion.

Many Spaniards seemed to regard Sulu as a very desirable country for
colonization and offered many suggestions as to the most favorable
sites for factories, the best industries that could be developed,
and the best methods and means of exploitation. Several farms were
started in the vicinity of Jolo, but they were abandoned even before
the evacuation of the islands, and no effective step can be said to
have been taken by Spain to colonize Sulu except the building up of the
town of Jolo itself. This subject has therefore played no important