part in the policy exercised by Spain in Sulu and very little can be
said in this connection. It must, however, be stated that the lands
of the Archipelago of Sulu are extremely limited in area and should
have been reserved for the Sulus. Perfect disinterestedness should
have been exhibited by the Spaniards in this regard. [225]


APPENDIXES TO PART II


APPENDIX I

THE PACIFICATION OF MINDANAO BY RONQUILLO


[Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas, Dr. Antonio de Morga, Mexico,
1609.] [226]

Shortly after Don Francisco Tello had taken over the governorship,
news was brought of the death of Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa in
Mindanao by Brother Gaspar Gomez of the Society of Jesus. The latter
brought the body for burial in the college of Manila, of which Don
Esteban was patron. Juan de la Xara wrote that he had charge of
affairs, that he had settled in Tampakan, [227] that he intended to
continue the pacification and conquest of the island as should seem
most advisable, and that reënforcements of men and other things should
be sent him. It was learned that he intended to make an ill use of
the government, and would not remain dependent on, and subordinate
to, the governor of the Philippines; and that he was depriving the
heirs of Esteban Rodriguez of what lawfully belonged to them. It
was learned that, in order to make himself safer in this respect,
he was sending his confidants to the town of Arévalo in Oton where
Don Esteban had left his wife, Doña Ana de Osseguera, and his two
small daughters, with his house and property, to persuade Doña Ana
to marry him. This resolution appeared injurious in many respects,
and the attempt was made to rectify matters. But in order not to
disturb the affairs of Mindanao, the matter was left alone for the
present, until time should show the course to be followed. And so it
happened that when Juan de la Xara left the camp and settlements of
Mindanao, and came hurriedly to Oton to negotiate his marriage in
person--although the widow of Don Esteban had never been favorable
to it--Don Francisco Tello sent men to arrest him. He was brought to
Manila, where he died while his trial was being conducted.

After the imprisonment of Juan de la Xara, Don Francisco Tello
immediately sent Captain Toribio de Miranda to Mindanao, with orders to
take command of the camp and to govern until some one should agree
to continue the enterprise. When he arrived at Mindanao and the
soldiers saw that Juan de la Xara's schemes had been defeated, and
that the latter was a prisoner in Manila, with no hope of returning,
they obeyed Toribio de Miranda and the orders that he brought.

In Manila the governor was considering carefully the necessary
measures for continuing the war, since the island of Mindanao was so
near the other pacified islands, and the island itself contained some
provinces that professed peace and were apportioned as encomiendas
and had Spanish magistrates, such as the rivers of Butuan, Dapitan,
and Karaga, so that it was desirable to pacify the whole island and
subject it to His Majesty. The royal treasury was spent and could
not bear the expense; and Esteban Rodriguez had bound himself by a
legal writ to carry the war to entire completion at his own expense,
in accordance with the terms of his agreement. The guardian of his
children and heirs brought the matter before the court, and refused
to fulfill this obligation on account of Esteban Rodriguez's death. In
order not to lose time, for what had been commenced had to be continued
in one way or another, the governor decided to prosecute it, drawing
the necessary funds from the royal treasury, either on its own account
or on the account of Esteban Rodriguez's heirs, if such should be
according to law. The governor then searched for a person to go to
Mindanao, and selected Don Juan Ronquillo, general of the galleys. The
latter was given the necessary reënforcements of men and other things,
with which he reached Mindanao. He took command of the Spanish camp and
fleet which he found in Tampakan. He confirmed the peace and friendship
with the chiefs and people of Tampakan and Lumagan, restored and set
in better order the Spanish settlement and fort, and began to make
preparation for the war against the people of Bwayan. [228] He spent
many days in making a few incursions into their land and attacks on
their forts, but without any notable result, for the enemy were many
and all good soldiers, with plenty of arquebuses and artillery, and
had fortified themselves in a strong position. They had many other
fortifications inland and went from one to the other with impunity,
whenever they wished, and greatly harassed the Spaniards, who were
little used to so swampy a country. The latter found themselves short
of provisions without the possibility of getting them in the country
on account of the war, inasmuch as the camp contained many men,
both Spaniards and the native servants and boatmen, and it was not
easy at all times to come and go from one part to another in order
to provide necessities.

Meanwhile Don Juan Ronquillo, seeing that the war was advancing very
slowly and with little result, and that the camp was suffering, drew up
a report of it, and sent letters in all haste to Governor Don Francisco
Tello, informing him of the condition of affairs. He wrote that it
would be better to withdraw the camp from Mindanao River, so that
it might not perish; and that a presidio could be established on the
same island in the port of La Caldera, which could be left fortified,
in order not to abandon this enterprise entirely, and so that their
friends of Tampakan and Lumagan might be kept hostile to the people of
Bwayan. Meanwhile he and the rest of the camp and fleet would return
to Manila, if permitted, for which he requested the governor to send
him an order quickly. Upon the receipt of this dispatch, Governor Don
Francisco Tello resolved to order Don Juan Ronquillo, since the above
was so and the camp could not be maintained, nor the war continued
advantageously, to withdraw with his whole camp from Mindanao River. He
was first to make a great effort to chastise the enemy in Bwayan, and
then to burn the Spanish settlement and fort and go to La Caldera,
fortify it, and leave there a sufficient garrison with artillery,
boats, and provisions for its maintenance and service. Then he was
to return to Manila with the rest of his men, after telling their
friends in Tampakan that the Spaniards would shortly return to the
river better equipped and in great numbers.

Silonga [229] and other chiefs of Bwayan were not neglecting their
defense, since, among other measures taken, they had sent a chief
to Ternate to ask assistance against the Spaniards who had brought
war into their homes. Thereupon the King of Ternate dispatched a
numerous fleet of caracoas and other boats to Mindanao with cachils
[230] and valiant soldiers--more than 1,000 fighting men in all--and
a quantity of small artillery, in order to force the Spaniards to
break camp and depart, even could they do nothing else. When the news
reached Bwayan that this fleet was coming to their defense and support,
they made ready and prepared to attack the Spaniards, who also having
heard the same news were not careless. Consequently the latter turned
their attention more to the main fort, and reduced the number of men
in the smaller forts on Butil [231] River and other posts, mouths,
and arms of the same river. These served to strengthen the garrison of
the main fort and the armed galleys and other smaller craft, in order
to use the latter to resist the expected attack of the enemy. The
enemy having gallantly advanced to the very fort of the Spaniards
with all their vessels and men, attacked and stormed it with great
courage and resolution, in order to effect an entrance. The Spaniards
within resisted valiantly, and those outside in the galleys on the
river assisted them so effectively that together, with artillery and
arquebuses, and at times in close combat with swords and kampilan,
they made a great slaughter and havoc among the men of Ternate and
those of Bwayan, who were aiding the former. They killed and wounded a
great number of them and captured almost all the caracoas and vessels
of the enemy, so that very few boats escaped, and they were pursued
and burned by the Spaniards, who made many prisoners and seized immense
booty and many weapons from the enemy. As soon as possible after this,
the Spaniards turned against the settlements and forts of Bwayan where
some of their results were of so great moment that the enemy, seeing
themselves hard pressed and without anyone to help them, sent messages
and proposals of peace to Don Juan Ronquillo, which were ended by their
rendering recognition and homage, and the renewal of friendship with
the people of Tampakan, their ancient enemy. In order to strengthen
the friendship, they sealed it by the marriage of the greatest chief
and lord of Bwayan with the daughter of another chief of Tampakan,
called Dungunlibur. Thereupon the war was apparently completely ended,
provisions were now to be had, and the Spaniards with little precaution
crossed and went about the country wherever they wished. The people of
Bwayan promised to dismantle all their forts immediately, for that was
one of the conditions of peace. Then the Spaniards returned to their
fort and settlements at Tampakan, whence Don Juan Ronquillo immediately
sent dispatches to Governor Don Francisco Tello, informing him of the
different turn that the enterprise had taken. In view of the present
condition he requested the governor to issue new instructions as to
his procedure, saying that he would wait without making any change,
notwithstanding the arrival of the answer which he expected to his
first report, for conditions had now become so much better than before
that the governor's decision would be different.

The governor had already answered Don Juan Ronquillo's first dispatch,
as we have said above, when the second dispatch arrived with news
of the successes in Mindanao. Suspicious of the men in the camp who
had constantly shown a desire to return to Manila, and little relish
for the hardships of war, and fearing lest they would return at the
arrival of the first order, executing that order and abandoning the
enterprise which had reached such a satisfactory stage; and thinking
that it would be unwise to abandon the river, the governor made haste
to send a second dispatch immediately by various roads, ordering them
to pay no attention to his first orders, but to remain in Mindanao, and
that he would soon send them what was necessary for further operations.

It seems that this message traveled slowly; for, the first having
arrived, they obeyed it without any further delay, and camp was
raised and the country abandoned. To their former enemy of Bwayan
they gave as a reason that the governor of Manila had summoned them;
and to their friends of Tampakan they said that they would leave
men in La Caldera for their security, and that assistance would be
sent them from Manila. This news caused as much sorrow and sadness
to the latter as joy to the people of Bwayan. Then, after burning
their fort and settlement, the Spaniards embarked all their forces as
soon as possible, left the river, and went to La Caldera, 24 leagues
farther down in the direction of Manila. Having entered port, they
built a fortress and left there a garrison of 100 Spaniards, with
some artillery, provisions, and boats for their use.

At this juncture the governor's second message to General Don Juan
Ronquillo arrived, to which the latter replied that he was already
in La Caldera, and could not return to the river. Then, without any
further delay, Don Juan Ronquillo went to Manila with the balance of
his fleet, by way of the Provinces of Oton and Panay. The governor,
having heard of his coming, sent to arrest him on the road before
he entered the city, and proceeded against him by law for having
withdrawn the camp and army from Mindanao River, without awaiting the
orders he should have expected after the favorable turn that affairs
had taken. Don Juan Ronquillo was set at liberty on showing a private
letter from the governor, which the latter had sent him separately
with the first instructions, to the effect that he should return
to Manila with his troops in any event, for they were needed in the
Islands for other purposes; and because of this letter Don Juan had
determined not to await the second order.


APPENDIX II

THE PACIFICATION OF MINDANAO [232]


[Concerning the pacification of the Island of Mindanao in the
year 1600.] [233]


In the relation of the last year you will have learned how occurred
the death, in the pacification of the Island of Mindanao, of Esteban
Rodriguez de Figueroa, who offered to carry out this pacification
under the conditions which he stipulated with Gomez Perez Dasmariñas,
formerly governor of these islands, copies of which were sent
to His Majesty and to Master-of-Camp Juan de Lajara, formerly of
the said expedition, who succeeded to his place when the camp was
abandoned, and came to Manila. Don Francisco Tello, Governor and
Captain-General of the said Philippine Islands, who at that time
had taken possession of the government, was considering how to aid
and stimulate the said pacification at the expense of the heirs
of Esteban Rodriguez, and with the agreement of the captains and
persons who were long resident and experienced in war in the said
islands. Don Juan Ronquillo was appointed commander of the galleys
to prosecute the said pacification, and in the meantime, in order to
be present and continue the expedition, Capt. Toribio de Miranda was
sent forward to encourage and animate the troops, under orders to
keep them in his charge; and in case the post should be abandoned,
and a retreat made to Manila, he should detain the troops and return
to Mindanao. The said Capt. Toribio de Miranda having arrived at the
Island [234] of La Caldera, which lies 40 leagues from the river of
Mindanao, there found the whole camp, which was returning from the said
islands. Conformably to the orders which he had, he turned back and
fortified the site where they had first been, which was on the river,
4 leagues from the forts of the enemy. Juan Ronquillo, having been
dispatched to Mindanao, had taken the camp in his charge, and begun
to achieve some success. He achieved a victory in the battle which he
fought with the Ternatans, who had entered with 800 men to give aid
to the people of Mindanao. Before these successes, he had written a
letter in disparagement of that country (a copy of which was sent to
His Majesty), on account of which, in a council of war which had been
held, the General Don Ronquillo had been ordered to make a last effort
against the Mindanaos, doing them all possible damage. He was then to
come to the Island [235] of La Caldera and there build a fort, to be
garrisoned with a hundred Spanish soldiers, with artillery, arms, and
munitions, and leave them there as a check upon Ternate and Mindanao,
in charge of a good soldier, one of the captains of the camp, and
with the rest return to Manila. Although Don Juan Ronquillo received
this order, after having won considerable victories, he again wrote
that he would not abandon that place, even if such were the order,
because it would not be expedient to retire from the camp and comply
with what had been ordered, when he was leaving the Island of Mindanao
already pacified, the chiefs, with whom he had used gentle means, that
they might all be more contented, having again rendered submission to
His Majesty, and likewise as the King of Sulu again rendered obedience
and submission. Confiding in this, Capt. Cristobal Villagra, whom Don
Juan Ronquillo had appointed commander of the garrison of La Caldera,
had sent 30 soldiers to the Island of Sulu for supplies. They found at
this time in Jolo a Mindanao chief, an uncle of the King of Mindanao
and a brother-in-law of the King of Sulu, who had been driven out
of Mindanao because he was rebellious. He treacherously killed 13
Spanish soldiers. When news of this was brought, Juan Pacho was
sent to take the troops of La Caldera in charge, and, when it should
seem best to him, to try to inflict punishment with 600 Spaniards;
the enemy unfortunately killed the said Juan Pacho and 29 Spaniards,
the rest of them retiring without any success. This news having come
to the governor, he sent in place of Juan Pacho, Capt. Toribio de
Miranda, a person in whom he had entire confidence, with an order not
to attempt any punishment until he had force enough for it. After
this Capt. Toribio de Miranda arrived at La Caldera on the 26th of
August, 1599. When the garrison was given into his charge he put
the defensive works in order, and with the arms which he brought,
and those which he found in the fort, he armed all the troops,
amounting to 114 soldiers. As directed by an order of the governor,
he sent a chief of the Pintados [Bisayans] to Mindanao with letters to
the chiefs of the island, in which he informed them that they would be
protected, favored, and upheld in justice, as vassals of His Majesty,
and that with this object a garrison had been placed in La Caldera;
and that to aid in maintaining it, and in covering the expenses which
they had caused in the war by their disobedience, the largest possible
quantity of tributes would be collected for His Majesty, and that he
would send for them shortly, which had not been done earlier because
the Mindanaos had been so spent and afflicted. Having arrived on the
2d of September at the river of Mindanao, and delivered his dispatch,
this chief was well received, and found the people in the settled
state in which Gen. Don Juan Ronquillo had left them. Raja Muda,
the main chief of Mindanao, in the name of them all, sent him back
on the 15th of the said month, offering to give to His Majesty all
the tribute which they could collect.

At this time news from the chief captain of Malacca having reached the
governor, to the effect that in the Sunda, [236] 150 leagues from that
port, there had been seen a number of English ships, whose designs were
not known; and, a little later, word from the commander of the fort of
Maluco that there were at Ternate, within the port, two English ships
with 400 men and 50 pieces of artillery; a council of war was held
as to what was best to do. The said council decided to withdraw the
garrison from La Caldera to Cebu, so that the enemy should not take
that place; and, if they should attempt to do damage to that province,
they would find it in a state of defense. Accordingly an order was
sent to Capt. Toribio de Miranda to withdraw with the troops, arms,
artillery, and munitions, dismantling the fort; he was also told that
he could return shortly to the island; with more troops and arms, in
order to assist in its defense. On the 9th of September Capt. Toribio
de Miranda arrived at Cebu, with all the troops, artillery, arms,
and munitions; and at the same time Gen. Don Juan Tello arrived at
Cebu with a hundred men, who came as reënforcement from the city
of Manila. Having spent six months there and commenced to build a
fort of stone, the governor, as they had no more news of the English
referred to, sent an order to the said Don Juan to come to the city
of Manila--which he did with the hundred men. leaving the Province
of Cebu in a prosperous condition, with the troops which are usually
kept there, and those of the garrison of La Caldera, which in all
amounted to 250 Spaniards.

After all this, in June of 1600, the governor received news, by way
of Malacca, that the ships which had passed to the South Sea belonged
to Dutch merchants, who had come to load with spices in the Maluco
Islands. Having transacted their business, they had returned to their
own country by way of India, without doing any damage to the islands
of the west; it therefore seems that we are safe, notwithstanding
the news received of those enemies.


APPENDIX III

THE MORO RAIDS OF 1599 AND 1600


[Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas, Dr. Antonio de Morga, Mexico,
1609.] [237]


The Spanish garrison left in La Caldera, at the withdrawal of Don
Ronquillo's camp from the river of Mindanao, passed into command
of Captain Villagra at the death of Capt. Juan Pacho in Jolo, and
was suffering for lack of provisions; for neither the people of the
river could give them to the Spaniards, nor would the Sulus furnish
any on account of the war declared upon them. Therefore the garrison
urgently requested Governor Don Francisco Tello either to aid their
presidio with provisions, soldiers, and ammunition, or to allow them
to retire to Manila--a thing of which they were most desirous--since
there they gained no other special result than that of famine, and
of incarceration in that fort, and of no place wherein to seek their
sustenance. The governor, in view of their insistence in the matter,
and having but little money in the royal exchequer, with which to
provide for and maintain the said presidio and for the same reason
the punishment that was to be inflicted upon the Sulus for their
outrages upon the Spaniards, and their insurrection was deferred--and
thinking that the return to Mindanao matters would be a long question,
he was inclined to excuse the difficulty and anxiety of maintaining the
presidio of La Caldera. In order to do it with a reasonable excuse he
consulted the Audiencia and other intelligent persons, and requested
them to give him their opinion. But he first communicated his wishes
to them and gave them some reasons with which he tried to persuade
them to give him the answer that he desired. The Audiencia advised him
not to remove or raise the garrison of La Caldera, but to reënforce
and maintain it, and to attend to the affairs of Sulu and the river
of Mindanao as soon as possible, even if what was necessary for those
two places should be withdrawn from some other section. They said that
this was the most urgent need, and the one which required the greatest
attention in the islands, both in order to pacify those provinces and
to keep them curbed; lest, seeing the Spaniards totally withdrawn,
they should gain courage and boldly venture still farther and come
down to make captures among the Pintados [Bisayans] and carry the
war to the very doors of the Spaniards. Notwithstanding this reply
the governor resolved to raise and withdraw the garrison, and sent
orders to Captain Villagra immediately to burn the fort which had
been built in La Caldera, to withdraw with all his men and ships,
and return to Manila. This was quickly done, for the captain and the
soldiers of the garrison waited for nothing more than to dismantle
the fort and leave. When the Sulus saw the Spaniards abandoning the
country, they were persuaded that the latter would return to Mindanao
no more, and that they had not sufficient forces to do so. Thereupon
they gained fresh resolution and courage, and united with the people
of Bwayan on the river, and equipped a number of caracoas and other
craft, in order to descend upon the coast of Pintados (Bisayas)
to plunder them and make captives. The people of Tampakan, who
lost hope of receiving further help from the Spaniards, and of the
latter's return to the river, since they had also abandoned the fort
of La Caldera and left the country, came to terms with and joined
the people of Bwayan, their neighbors, in order to avoid the war and
injuries that they were suffering from the latter. Then all turned
their arms against the Spaniards, promising themselves to make many
incursions into their territory and gain much plunder. Accordingly
they prepared their fleet and appointed as leaders and commanders of
it two of the experienced chiefs of the river of Mindanao, called
Sali and Silungan. [238] They left the Mindanao River in the month
of July of the year 1599, in the season of the vendabals, [239]
with 50 caracoas, containing more than 3,000 soldiers armed with
arquebuses, kampilan, carasas, [240] other weapons with handles, and
many culverins, and steered toward the islands of Oton and Panay, and
neighboring islands. They passed Negros Island and went to the river
of Panay, which they ascended for 5 leagues to the chief settlement,
where the alcalde-mayor and some Spaniards were living. They sacked
the settlement, burned the houses and churches, captured many native
Christians--men, women, and children--upon whom they committed many
murders, cruelties, and outrages. They pursued these in boats more
than 10 leagues up the river, and destroyed all the crops. For the
alcalde-mayor, and those who could, fled inland among the mountains,
and accordingly the enemy had a better opportunity to do what they
pleased. After they had burned all the vessels in the river, they
left the river of Panay with their boats laden with pillaged goods
and captive Christians. They did the same in the other islands and
towns which they passed. Then they returned to Mindanao, without
any opposition being offered, with a quantity of gold and goods and
more than 800 captives, besides the people whom they had killed. In
Mindanao they divided the spoil, and agreed to get ready a larger
fleet for the next year, and return to make war better prepared. [241]

This daring attack of the Mindanaos worked great injury to the Pintado
Islands [Bisayas], both on account of their deeds there and also on
account of the fear and terror with which they inspired the natives;
because of the latter being in the power of the Spaniards, who kept
them subject, tributary, and disarmed, and neither protected them from
their enemies, nor left them the means to defend themselves, as they
used to do when there were no Spaniards in the country. Therefore many
towns of peaceful and subjected Indians revolted and withdrew to the
tingues, [242] and refused to descend to their houses, magistrates,
and encomenderos. [243] As was reported daily, they all had a great
desire to revolt and rebel, but they were appeased and reduced
again to subjection by a few promises and presents from their
encomenderos and religious who showed great pity and sadness over
their injuries. Although in Manila people regretted these injuries,
and still more those which were expected in the future from the enemy,
they did nothing but regret them--since the governor was ill provided
with ships and other necessities for the defense--and reckon them
with the loss which they had suffered for having raised the camp on
the river of Mindanao and dismantled the presidio of La Caldera.

As soon as the weather permitted, the Mindanaos and Sulus returned
with a large fleet of more than 70 well-equipped ships and more than
4,000 fighting men, led by the same Silungan and Sali, and other
Mindanao and Sulu chiefs, to the same Islands of Pintados [Bisayas],
with the determination of taking and sacking the Spanish town of
Arévalo, which is situated in Oton. Capt. Juan García de Sierra,
alcalde mayor of that province, having heard of this expedition and
of the designs entertained by the enemy, took the most necessary
precautions, and gathering into the town all the Spaniards who
lived there and in its neighborhood, shut himself up in it with
all of them. Then, having repaired, as well as possible, a wooden
fort there, he gathered there the women and their possessions. He
and the Spaniards--about 70 men--armed with arquebuses, awaited the
enemy. The latter, who intended to attack the river of Panay again,
passed Negros Island and made for the town of Arévalo, where they
anchored close to the native settlement. Then they landed 1,500 men
armed with arquebuses, kampilan, and carasas, and, without stopping
on the way marched against the Spanish town which was the object of
their attack. The Spaniards, divided into troops, sallied forth and
opened fire with their arquebuses upon the enemy with such vehemence
that they forced them to retreat and take refuge on board their
caracoas. So great was the enemy's confusion that many Mindanaos
were killed before they could embark. Capt. Juan García de Sierra,
who was on horseback, pursued the enemy so closely to the water's edge
that the latter cut off the legs of his mount with their kampilan and
brought him to the ground, where they killed him. The enemy embarked
with a heavy loss of men, and halted at the Island of Gimarás, [244]
in sight of Arévalo. There they counted their men, including the dead
and the wounded, who were not a few, and among whom was one of the
most noted chiefs and leaders. Then they sailed for Mindanao, making
a great show of grief and sorrow, and sounding their bells [245]
and tifas. [246] They made no further delay at Pintados [Bisayas],
deriving little profit or gain from the expedition but much injury,
and loss of men and reputation, which was felt more deeply upon their
arrival in Sulu and Mindanao. In order to remedy this disaster, it
was proposed to renew their expedition against the Pintados at the
first monsoon with more ships and men, and it was so decided.


APPENDIX IV

GALLINATO'S EXPEDITION TO JOLO


[Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas, Dr. Antonio de Morga, Mexico,
1609.] [247]


The daring and audacity of the Mindanaos and Sulus in making incursions
with their fleets into the Islands of Pintados [Bisayas] had reached
such a state that it was now expected that they would come as far as
Manila, plundering and devastating. In order to check them, at the
beginning of the year 1602, Governor Don Francisco Tello, deriving
strength from weakness, determined that the expedition against Sulu
should be made at once, without more delay, in order to punish and
pacify it, with the forces and men whom Capt. and Sargento-mayor
Juan Xuarez Gallinato held in Cebu and in the Pintados [Bisayas]
together with more men, ships, and provisions, which were sent him,
accompanied by the necessary documents and instructions for him
to enter the island, chastise its king and inhabitants, and pacify
and reduce it to the obedience of his Majesty. By this means, until
there should be an opportunity to settle the affairs of Mindanao,
which is quite near Sulu, the audacity of the enemy would be checked;
and by bringing the war into his own country, he would not come out
to commit depredations. Captain Gallinato set out on this expedition
with 200 Spanish soldiers, ships, artillery, enough provisions for four
months--the time which it was thought the expedition would last--and
with Indians as rowers for the ships and for other services that might
arise. When he arrived at Sulu, at the bar of the river of this island,
which is 2 leagues from the principal town and dwellings of the king,
he landed his men, artillery, and the necessary provisions and left
his ships under a sufficient guard. The islanders were all in the town
and dwellings of the king, which are situated on a very high hill above
some cliffs, and have two roads of approach through paths and roads so
narrow that they can be reached only in single file. They had fortified
the whole place, intrenched it with palms and other woods and a number
of culverins. They had also collected provisions and water for their
sustenance, besides a supply of arquebuses and other weapons. They
had neither women nor children with them, for they had taken them out
of the island. They had requested aid from the people of Mindanao,
Bruney, and Ternate, and were awaiting the same, since they had been
informed of the fleet which was being prepared against them in the
Pintados [Bisayas]. Gallinato determined to pitch his camp near the
town before this aid should arrive, and to attack the fort. After he
had quartered himself at a distance of one-half league, in a plain
facing the ascent, he sent interpreters with messages to the king and
chiefs of the island, calling on them to surrender, and telling them
that good terms would be given them. While waiting for an answer,
he fortified his quarters in that spot, intrenching himself wherever
necessary. He mounted the artillery in the best position for use,
and kept his men ready for any emergency. A false and deceptive answer
was returned, making excuses for the excesses that had been committed,
and for not complying just then with what had been asked of them, and
making loud promises to do so later. All this was with the object of
detaining the captain in that place, which is very unhealthy, until the
rains should set in, his provisions run short, and the arrival of the
expected aid. After this answer had been received the Sulus, thinking
that the Spaniards had become more careless on account of it, swarmed
down quickly from the said fort in a large body of probably somewhat
over one thousand; and armed with arquebuses and other weapons with
handles, kampilan, and caraças, attacked and assaulted the quarters
and camp of the Spaniards. This could not be done so secretly as not
to be seen by the Spaniards and allow them opportunity to prepare
to receive the Sulus before their arrival. This the Spaniards did,
and having permitted the natives to come all together in a body to
the very inside of the quarters and trenches, as soon as the Sulus
had discharged their arquebuses the Spaniards opened fire upon them,
first with their artillery, and then with their arquebuses, killing
many, and forcing the rest to retire in flight to the fort. The
Spaniards pursued them, wounding and killing to the middle of the
hill. But seeing that farther on the paths were so narrow and rough,
they retreated before the heavy artillery fire from the heights
and the large stones hurled down upon them and returned to their
quarters. Upon many other days efforts were made to reach the fort,
but without any result. Thereupon Gallinato, in consideration of the
war being prolonged beyond what had been expected, built two forts,
one where he kept his ships in order to defend them and the port;
and the other one-half league farther on in a suitable place where
they could take refuge and communicate with the camp. The forts were
built of wood and fascines and fortified with the artillery from the
ships. The Spaniards shut themselves up in these forts, whence from
time to time they sallied, making incursions as far as the enemy's
fort. The latter always remained shut up in their fort without ever
choosing to come down or to yield; for he was convinced that the
Spaniards could not remain long in the island. When Gallinato saw that
the rains were fast setting in, that his men were becoming ill, and
that his provisions were failing without his having accomplished the
desired task, and that it could not be accomplished with his remaining
resources, and that the enemy from Mindanao with other allies of theirs
were boasting that they were gathering a large fleet in order to drive
the Spaniards from Jolo, he sent news of all that had occurred to the
governor of Manila, with a plan of the island and fort and a relation
of the difficulties which the enterprise presented. He sent this in a
vessel, by Capt. and Sargento-mayor Pedro Cotelo de Morales, toward the
end of May of the year 1602, in order to obtain instructions as to his
procedure, and the necessary reënforcement of men and provisions. The
captain was charged to return quickly with the answer. * * *

At the same time that Governor Don Pedro de Acuña entered upon
his administration, the captain and sargento-mayor, Pedro Cotelo
de Morales, arrived from Jolo with the advices and report of Juan
Xuarez Gallinato concerning the state of affairs in that island,
whither he had gone with the fleet at the beginning of that same
year. The governor, on account of the importance of the matter,
wished to make every effort possible, and determined to send him
supplies and a reënforcement of some men, which he did as soon as
possible. He was ordered to at least make an effort to punish that
enemy, even if he could do nothing more, and whenever the opportunity
presented itself, to go to do the same thing in the river of Mindanao,
and return to the Pintados [Bisayas]. When this commission reached
Jolo Gallinato was already so worn out, and his men so ill, that the
reënforcements only made it possible for him to get away from there;
accordingly without seeing to another thing, he broke camp, burned the
forts which he had built, embarked, and went to Pintados, leaving the
people of that Island of Sulu and their neighbors, those of Mindanao,
emboldened more than ever to make raids against the Pintados, and
the islands within, which they did.

The governor, without delaying any longer in Manila, hastily started
for the Island of Panay and the town of Arévalo, in a galliot and
other small vessels, to see their needs with his own eyes, in order to
provide for them. He left war matters in Manila, during his absence, in
charge of Licentiate Don Antonio de Ribera, auditor of the Audiencia.

As soon as the governor left Manila, the auditor had plenty to look
after, because a squadron of 20 caracoas and other vessels from
Mindanao entered the islands as far as the Island of Luzon and its
coasts, making captures. Having taken some ships bound from Cebu
to Manila, they captured 10 Spaniards in them, among them a woman
and a priest and Capt. Martin de Mandia, and they took them off with
them. They entered Calilaya, burned the church and all the town, and
captured many persons of all classes among the natives. Thence they
passed to the town of Balayan to do the same, but the auditor, having
received news of the enemy in Manila, had it already in a state of
defense with 50 Spaniards and a captain and some vessels. Consequently,
they did not dare to enter the town or its bay, but crossed over
to Mindoro, where, in the principal town, they captured many men,
women, and children among the natives, seizing their gold and
possessions, and burning their houses and church, where they captured
the prebendary Corral, curate of that doctrina. They filled their
own ships, and others which they seized there, with captives, gold,
and property, staying in the port of Mindoro as leisurely as though
in their own land, notwithstanding that it is but 24 leagues from
Manila. Capt. Martin de Mendia, prisoner of these pirates, offered,
for himself and the other Spanish captives that, if they would let
him go to Manila, he would get the ransom for all, and would take
it, or would send it within six months, to the river of Mindanao,
or otherwise he would return to their power. The chief in command of
the fleet agreed thereto, with certain provisions and conditions,
and caused the other captives to write to the effect that what had
been agreed upon might be fulfilled, and then he allowed the captain
to leave the fleet. The latter came to the city, and upon receiving his
report, the auditor sent munitions, ships, and more men to Balayan than
there were there already, with orders to go in pursuit of the enemy
without delay, saying that they would find him in Mindoro. Capt. Gaspar
Perez, who had charge of this in Balayan, did not start so quickly as
he should have done in order to find the enemy in Mindoro, for when
he arrived he found that he had left that port six days before, laden
with ships and booty, to return to Mindanao. Then he went in pursuit
of him, although somewhat slowly. The enemy put into the river of a
little uninhabited island to get water and wood. Just at that time
Governor Don Pedro de Acuña, who was hastily returning to Manila,
from the town of Arevalo, where he had learned of the incursion of
those pirates, passed. He passed so near the mouth of the river, in
two small champanes [248] and a virrey, [248] with very few men, that
it was a wonder that he was not seen and captured by the enemy. He
learned that the enemy was there, from a boat of natives which was
escaping therefrom, and then he met Gaspar Perez going in search of
the enemy with twelve vessels--caracoas and virreys and some large
champanes. The governor made him make more haste and gave him some
of his own men to guide him to where he had left the pirates the day
before, whereupon they went to attack them. But the latter espied
the fleet through their sentinels whom they had already stationed in
the sea, outside the river. Accordingly they left the river in haste,
and took to flight, throwing into the sea goods and slaves in order
to flee more lightly. Their flagship and almiranta caracoas protected
the ships which were dropping behind and made them throw overboard what
they could and work with all the strength of their paddles, assisted by
their sails. The Spanish fleet, the vessels of which were not so light,
could not put forth enough strength to overtake all of them, because,
furthermore, they went into the open without fear of the heavy seas
which were running, inasmuch as they were fleeing. Yet some of the
ships of Capt. Gaspar Perez, being lighter, got the enemy's fleet,
sunk some caracoas, and captured two, but the rest escaped, although
with great danger of being lost. Without accomplishing anything else,
the fleet returned to Manila where the governor had already entered,
very much disturbed that things should have come to such a pass that
these enemies, who had never dared to leave their houses, should have
been so daring and bold as to come to the very gates of the city,
doing great damage and making captures.


APPENDIX V

OLASO'S EXPEDITION IN 1629 [249]


[Relation of events in the Philippine Islands and other surrounding
regions, from the month of July, 1629, until that of 1630.] [250]


I shall commence the affairs of these islands with the expedition to
Jolo. It is an island of the Archipelago, rebellious for years past,
and its natives, who are Mohammedans, have made a thousand incursions
against us in these islands, pillaging whenever opportunity arises,
burning villages and churches, and capturing numerous people.

In order to remedy all these evils, Governor Don Juan Niño de Tabora
determined to equip a powerful fleet in order to destroy that enemy and
conquer a stronghold which nature has made in their island so lofty
and so difficult of approach that there is no better stone castle,
for the approach to it is by one path, and it has some artillery
which defends it. The people are courageous and warlike. For our
fleet were collected 1 galley, 3 brigantines, 12 freight champanes
(which are like small pataches) [251] and about 50 caracoas. The last
named are the usual craft of these islands, and generally have thirty
or forty oars on a side. All these vessels together carried about 400
Spaniards and 2,500 Indians, and they had considerable apparatus and
war supplies. It was quite sufficient for another conquest of greater
importance than the one on which they were going.

All that fleet departed, then, from the port of Dapitan on March
17. Dapitan is the port nearest to the enemy, and the Island of Sulu
was reached in [blank space in the Ventura del Arco MS.] days. At
dawn our men were landed, and began the ascent to the stronghold. The
master-of-camp, Don Lorenzo de Olaso, who was commander in chief
of the fleet, preceded the men. The Sulus defended their stronghold
with valor. They killed some of our men and wounded eight, among them
the master-of-camp himself. He was overthrown, as if dead, and went
rolling down the hill. However, he was not dead, but only wounded,
nothing more. Our men retired on the run, and to speak plainly, such
terror entered into them that they did not dare to attack again. They
skirted the island in their craft, entered the villages, burned,
wrecked, destroyed them, and killed a few people. They brought back
some captives with them whom the Sulus had taken from us. A violent
storm overtook them, which compelled them to weigh anchor, and they
retired stealthily. Thus so powerful a fleet as that was lost. It was
such a fleet that never has one like it been made for the Indies in
these islands. The Sulu enemy were left triumphant, and so insolent
that we fear that they will make an end of the Islands of the Pintados
[Bisayas] which are the nearest ones to them, and which they infest
and pillage with great facility.


APPENDIX VI

CORCUERA'S CAMPAIGN IN JOLO [252]


In my last letter I wrote to your Reverence of the result of the first
attack, which was unfortunate, because the Moros repulsed us, as I told
your Reverence. Not less unfortunate will be the news that I shall
now relate, [253] which it is yet necessary for me to tell, in order
to fulfil my duty and to remove the clouds arising from rumors and
letters that will go there. I am here and see everything; and there is
never a lack of those who tell many new things and exaggerate matters
that are not so great as they will relate and descant there, where
no one can report and declare what has happened. It is as follows:

Since that attack, we have made two others. The first was with five
mines which we had made, with which we expected to blow up a great
part of those walls. All of the mines were fired, and thinking that
they would cause the same effects as the others our men retired
farther than they ought to have done. Four of the mines exploded,
and did not a little damage among the enemy. They, full of fear,
fled down from their position; but, as the mines did not make the
noise that we expected, we did not, accordingly, get there in time,
as we were quite distant because of our fear lest the mines do us
harm. The Moros retook their position, so that we were repulsed this
time, as we had been the other, with the death of a captain, while some
men were wounded. The fifth mine was left, and did not explode that
time. Hence its mouth was looked for, and having found it, we tried
two days after that to make another assault. The assault was made after
the mine had exploded. That mine was larger than the others had been,
and caused much damage. But the Moros fortified themselves again,
with greater strength than they had the last two times, and defended
themselves in their trenches, which had been fortified with many
stockades and terrepleins, so that we could not enter. We lost some
soldiers on that occasion, who tried to show that they were bold and
valiant. Among them was the sargento-mayor, Melon, who was struck by
a ball which passed through him and carried him off in two days. May
God rest his soul! Thereupon, we retired to our posts and endeavored
to collect our men and carry away the wounded, who were many. We
have lost four captains of renown in these three assaults--namely,
Captain Pimienta, Captain Juan Nicolas, Captain Don Pedro de Mena, and
Sargento-mayor Gonzales de Caseres Melon. Besides these three assaults,
another misfortune happened to us on St. Matthew's day, which was as
follows: Captain Rafael Ome, going with forty-six men and two hundred
Indians to make a garo [254] (as we say here), and having taken up
quarters in a field, where there was a fortified house, arranged
his posts at intervals and ordered his men to be on their guard. But
since man proposes and God disposes, the posts were either careless,
or God ordained it thus; for suddenly the enemy rushed upon our men,
who could not unite, as they were by that time scattered through the
forest. The enemy, having caught them off their guard, made a pastime
of it, killing twenty-six men, and carrying off arms, powder, balls and
fuses. I regard that event as the greatest of all our losses. Among
those of our men killed there by the enemy was Captain Lopez Suarez,
a fine soldier. Our men were not disheartened by these reverses,
except such and such men. The governor well sustains the undertaking
with [all his powers of] mind and body. He has surrounded the entire
hill with a stockade and a ditch, and has sown the ground with sharp
stakes so that the enemy may neither receive aid nor sally out from
it. At intervals there are sentry-posts and towers, so close that they
almost touch. There were six barracks along it, so that if any tower
should be in need the soldiers in them could go to its defense. Some
of them have six men, others four, and those which have least three
men, as a guard. The enclosure is one league long and surrounds the
hill. I do not know which causes the more wonder, the fort of the
Moros or the enclosure of the Spaniards which restrains the Moros,
so that they issue but seldom, and then at their peril. We are day
by day making gradual advances. Today a rampart was completed which
is just even with their stockades, so that we shall command the hill
equally [with the enemy]. God helping, I hope that we shall reduce
their trenches, and then we shall advance from better to better. May
God aid us; and si Dominus a custodierit civitatem frustra vigilat qui
custodit eam. [255] Father, prayers and many of them are needed. Will
your Reverence have them said in your holy college, and excuse me and
all of us for what we can not do. I forward this letter, [hoping] for
its good fortune in the holy sacrifices of your Reverence, etc. Jolo,
March 31, 1638. To the father-prior of Manila.


PAX CHRISTI, ETC.

I would like to be the bearer of this letter, and to fulfil my desires
of seeing your Reverence and all the fathers and brothers of your
Reverence's holy college. That is a proposition for which credit
may be given me, but the time gives space only to suffer; and thus
do we have to accommodate ourselves to it, and to check our desires,
drawing strength from weakness. I must content myself with writing,
which would be a pleasant task, if I could do it at my leisure, and not
so hastily as I have made known in certain letters that I have sent
to your Reverence--not losing or neglecting any occasion at which I
could write. And so that this opportunity should not pass without a
letter from me, I have hastened my pen beyond my usual custom, and
have written very concisely and briefly--although I could write at
greater length, and give account of many things which I leave for a
better occasion. That will be when it is the Lord's pleasure for us
to see each other. Moreover, I have no pleasant news to write, since
that which I could write would all be to the effect that we have not
gained this enchanted hill; and that, at the times when we have tempted
fortune, we have retired with loss of some men and many wounded.

Continuing, then, in the same style as the last letter, I declare
that since the first assault, in which we were driven back with the
loss of Captain Don Pedro Mena Pando, Adjutant Oliva, and Alférez
Trigita, we have made two other assaults. One was on the twenty-fourth
of March, the eve of our Lady of the Assumption. The second was on
the twenty-eighth of the same month. In the first, we trusted to the
mines that had been made, by means of which we expected to make a safe
entrance. We would have made it had our fear of receiving harm from
them matched the little fear of the enemy--who, as barbarians, did not
prepare for flight, although they knew our designs. Of the five mines,
four blew up; and as was seen, and as we afterward learned here from
some captives, there was a great loss to the enemy. As soon as they
saw the fire, they took to flight; but our men, being at a distance,
could not come up to seize the posts that the enemy abandoned,
until very late. That gave the Moros time to take precautions, so
that when we had come up, it was impossible to gain a single thing
which the mines had given us. On that occasion both sides fought very
valiantly. The wounded on our side were not many, and our dead even
fewer; among the later was Captain Pimienta. We were forced to return
to our posts without having gained more than the damage wrought by
the mines. The loss of those people was considerable, while not few
of them perished because of the severity of our fire. But with the
opportunity of the fifth mine which remained (which could not have
its effect, because the fire-channel of the others choked it), the
third attack was made inside of two days, by first setting fire to
that mine, and by arranging the men better than on the day of the
previous assault. They were set in array by the governor, who in
person came up to these quarters on that occasion. They set fire to
the mine, and more was accomplished than on the preceding days. Many
of the enemy were killed; but, as the entrance was so deeply recessed,
it could not be forced so freely by us, for the Moros were able to
defend it from us, with so great valor that we could not take it. Our
men fought with so great spirit and courage that it was necessary for
the leaders to use force with them in order to get the men to retire,
when they saw the so superior force of the enemy. On that occasion
they killed seven of our men, besides wounding many. Among the latter
was Sargento-mayor Melon, who was shot through the lung by a ball. He
died on the second day, to the grief of all this army. Thereupon his
Lordship made his men retire to their quarters, and commanded that the
fort should not be attacked, but that they should proceed to gain it by
the complete blockade of the enemy, as we are doing. By this method,
I think that we shall make an entrance into the fort. Already we
have one bulwark, which we have made level with their entrenchments;
and we are raising our works one and one-half varas [256] above them,
so that we are dislodging them with our artillery. They are retiring
to the interior of their fort. By this means we hope to gain entrance
into all their forts; and, once masters of them, I trust by God's
help that we shall conquer their stronghold, and that they will humble
themselves to obey God and the king.

Before those assaults, on St. Matthew's day, Captain Raphael Ome went
out to make a garo, as they say here, and to overrun the country. In
this island the level country is heavily wooded as nearly all of it is
mountainous. He took in his company about fifty men (i.e., Spaniards)
and two hundred Karaga Indians. The captain reached a field, and having
lodged in a fortified house, such as nearly all those houses are
(for those Indians of the mountain, who are called Guimennos, [257]
build them for their defense), he placed his sentries and seized the
positions that he judged most dangerous. But since non est volentis
neque currentis, etc., either because of the great multitude and the
wiliness of the enemy, or (as is more certain) because the sentries
were careless, and the other men asleep, the enemy came suddenly and
attacked our soldiers--with so great fury that they killed twenty-six
men, among whom was Captain Lopez Suarez, a brave soldier. The leader
and captain, Ome, was in great danger. He fought in person with so
great valor that, although run through with a spear, he attacked and
defeated his opponent, laying him dead at his feet. Few of our men
aided him, and many of them retreated immediately, thus allowing
the enemy to capture from us twenty firearms, with fuses, powder,
and balls. That was a great loss, and it is certain that we have not
hitherto had a greater. And if any loss has occurred, it has been
due to the neglect and confidence of the Spaniard.

Today two Basilan Indians came down from the hill to ask for mercy,
and for passage to their own country. They say that they are sent by
the datus in the stronghold who came from that island of Basilan or
Tagima; and that, if permission and pardon were given to them by the
pari [i.e., Corcuera], one hundred and thirty of them would come down
in the morning. We regard this as a trick of that Moro; and, although
it may be as they say, we are taking precautions, and are watching for
whatever may happen. If they should come, they will be well received;
and that will not be a bad beginning to induce others to come from
the hill. I shall advise your Reverence of such event on the first
occasion. What we know that they are suffering within [the fort] is
the disease of smallpox and discharges of blood, together with great
famine; because we have surrounded the entire hill with ditches and
stockades, set with sharp stakes, which run around it for more than
one and one-half leagues, and within musket-shot [of their fort] is a
sentry-post [garita] or tower in which three men and three Bantayas
are staying. By that means the enemy cannot enter or go out without
being seen; and, when they do that, they are given such a bombardment
that scarcely does any one dare to go outside of their walls. The
hill is a beautiful sight, and if it were enjoying holy peace instead
of war, it would be no small matter of entertainment and recreation
to survey the landscape at times. The Moro does not like to see us,
and is looking at us continually from his stronghold and yelling and
scoffing at us--as they say sometimes that the Spaniards are chickens;
again, that they are sibabuyes, [258] and again, that they will come
to set fire to us all, and kill us. The Moro is a great rascal and
buffoon. I trust in God that in a little while He will be ready for
our thanksgivings [for the defeat of the Moros]. Will your Reverence
urge His servants to aid us with their sacrifices and prayers. Those,
I believe, it will be that must give us the victory, and that must
humble the arrogance of this Mohammedan. His Lordship is displaying
great firmness and patience, as he is so great a soldier. Already has
he almost raised a stone fort on the beach, for he intends to leave
a presidio here, and I think that it will be almost finished before
he leaves. Nothing else occurs to me. Of whatever else may happen,
your Reverence will be advised on the first occasion. If I have gone
to considerable length in this letter, it is because I have known,
one day ahead, of the departure of this champan. I commend myself
many times to the holy sacrifices of your Reverence. This letter
will also serve for our father provincial, etc. Jolo, April 5, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-eight.

The Moro has returned today with a letter from the queen and all the
stronghold, in which they beg pardon and humiliate themselves. May
God grant it, and bring them to His knowledge. I shall advise you of
the result. I hear that Datu Ache is dead. If that is so, then the
end has come. Today, the sixth of the above month.


PAX CHRISTI.

Deo gratias qui dedit nobis victoriam per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum. [259] I have written your Reverence another letter, by way of
Oton, telling you that it was our Lord's pleasure to give us a joyous
Easter-tide, the beginning of what has happened. His Divine Majesty
has chosen to bestow upon us an overflowing blessing, by the reduction
of these Moros so that they should come, abased and humiliated, to
beg His governor for mercy; for, whether it was the latter's plan
to go to treat for peace at Basilan for their men, or whether they
should send them all, that they might see how the governor viewed their
petition, the following day they came with letters from the queen [260]
for Father Pedro Gutierrez and his Lordship. Therein she begged the
father to protect her, for she wished to come to throw herself at the
feet of the hari of Manila, and to beg his pardon for the obstinacy
that they had shown hitherto. The father answered for his Lordship,
in regard to the pardon, that if they agreed to do what was right,
they would be very gladly pardoned; but that in regard to their coming
it was not time, until they would humbly give up the arms which they
had taken from us, and the captives, vessels, and holy ornaments;
and that, even though the queen had so great authority, so long
as the king did not come, he must declare and show his willingness
to accept what the queen had written. Accordingly, the king wrote
to the same father and to his Lordship next day, begging the same
thing and more earnestly. But he was not allowed to come--which he
urgently entreated--until they should have given up the arms and
other things of which they robbed us. Difficulties arose over this
point, as to which of the two things was to be done first. The Moro
declared that he wished to treat first of the peace, and the points
on which they were to agree; and therefore it was necessary to see
the hari of Manila first of all. But Don Sebastian, as he was so
experienced in these matters of war (in which God has inspired him
with so wise resolutions, and given him even better results) held firm
to his proposals. Two days passed, but at last the king agreed to the
terms, by giving up the pieces of artillery which he had captured from
us. There were four iron pieces; and, in place of one which had burst,
one of bronze was requested, which many mines had buried. Afterward
we found the broken piece, by opening the mouth of one of the mines:
and he gave it to us willingly--saying that he had thus brought the
broken piece, and that he ought not for that reason to give another in
its place; and that which had been asked from him had been bought for
forty basines of gold at Makassar. In order that the Spaniards might
see what an earnest desire for a permanent peace was in his heart,
and that he was greatly inclined to it, he sent also some muskets,
although few and poor ones. In what pertained to the captives, he
said that he would surrender those that he had, but that he could not
persuade his datus to give up theirs; still he would ask them to give
their captives. At most, he sent eleven Christian captives, counting
men, women, and children. He had already spent the holy vessels, for,
since it was so long a time since they had been brought, he had sold
them to the king of Makassar; but he said that he and all his property
were there, to satisfy the Spaniards for any injury that they had
received. The king petitioned his Lordship to allow him to visit him;
and his Lordship granted such permission for Quasimodo Sunday.

The datus [sic] were very angry that the king was so liberal, and
because he humbled himself so deeply; accordingly, they opposed his
leaving the hill to talk with the governor. They tried to prevent it,
but the king overruled by the reasons which he gave to the datus, and
which father Gregorio Belin gave to him. His Lordship gave hostages
for the king, and ordered Captain Marquez and Captain Raphael Ome to
remain as such. They asked for Admiral Don Pedro de Almonte and two
fathers, but that was not granted to them. Finally they were satisfied
with the two said captains, persons of great esteem and worth; and the
king came down to talk with his Lordship, accompanied by many chief
men. His Lordship received him with such display as he could arrange at
short notice, under a canopy of damask, and seated on a velvet chair,
with a cushion of the same at his feet. Another cushion was placed
at his side upon a rug. As the king entered the hall, his Lordship
rose from his seat, and advancing two steps, embraced the Moro king;
then he made him sit down on the cushion that had been prepared. Then
his Lordship also seated himself beside the king in his chair, while
at his right side was his confessor, and at his left stood a captain
of the guard and the sargento-mayor. Grouped behind the confessor
were the fathers who were in the quarters on that occasion. There
were two Augustinian Recollects, and one Franciscan Recollect, and
a secular priest. Then came Father Gutierrez, and Father Gregorio
Belin. The king requested permission to rest a little first, for he
came, one of his servants fanning him (haciendole paypay), lifting
up from time to time the chinina which he wore--open in front,
in order to catch the breeze, and to enable him to shelter himself
from the heat, or to get rid of the fears with which he had come. His
chief men seated themselves after him on that open floor, a seat very
suitable for such nobility, who esteemed it as a great favor. Then when
the king was rested, or reassured from his fears, they began their
discourses or bicharas, talking, after the manner of these people,
by the medium of interpreters--namely, Father Juan de Sant Joseph,
an Augustinian Recollect, and Alférez Mathias de Marmolejo, both good
interpreters. The governor set forth his conditions. The agreement
made was: first, that the banners of the king, our sovereign, were
to be hoisted on the stronghold; second, that the men from Basilan
were to be permitted to leave the stronghold and go to their country;
third, that the Macassars and Malays were also to leave and return to
their own lands; and fourth, in order that the first condition might
be fulfilled without the rattle of arms and the shedding of blood,
all the enemy were to come down to our quarters, while the king and
queen and their family could come to that of the governor. The Moro
king did not like this last point; but, as he saw that matters were
ill disposed for his defense, he had to assent to everything. But,
before its execution, he begged his Lordship to communicate the
terms with his men and datus, saying that he would endeavor to get
them all to agree to the fulfilment of what his Lordship ordered;
and that in a day and a half he would reply and, in what pertained
to the other conditions, they would be immediately executed. This
happened, for the Basilans descended in two days with all their men
and families--in all, one hundred and forty-seven. Some fifty or sixty
did not then descend, as they were unable to do so. The Macassars
refused to descend until they received pardon from his Lordship,
and a passport to their own country. Therefore their captain came to
talk with his Lordship, who discussed with him what was to be done
with him and his men. The latter are very humble and compliant to
whatever his Lordship should order. His Lordship answered that he
would pardon their insolent and evil actions, and they could descend
with security of life; and that he would give them boats, so that they
could go away. Thereupon the captain, giving a kris as security that
they would come, returned, and immediately began to bring down his
property and men. The Malays came with them, for all those peoples
had united against the Castilians. They are the ones who have done
us most harm with their firearms, and have furnished quantities of
ammunition for all the firearms of the Sulus. At the end of the time
assigned to the king for answering his Lordship in regard to the
matters which he had discussed with him, he was summoned, in order
that what had been recently concluded might not be hindered, as his
Lordship had many matters to which to attend. If he would not come,
his Lordship was resolved immediately to continue his bombardment
and fortifications, saying that he would make slaves of all whom he
captured. With this resolution, the queen determined to come to visit
his Lordship; and, so saying and doing, she summoned her chair, and
had herself carried down to the quarters of Don Pedro de Almonte,
which is the one located on their hill, and which has given them
so much to do. She sent a message to the governor, begging him to
grant her permission, as she wished to see him. His Lordship sent a
message to her, to the effect that he would be very glad to see her,
and that she would be coming at a seasonable time. She came to the
hall borne on the shoulders of her men, accompanied by some of her
ladies and by her kasis, who was coming with pale face. She alighted
at the door of his Lordship's hall. He went out to receive her,
and with marked indications of friendship and kindness led her to
her seat, which was a cushion of purple velvet; and his Lordship,
seated in his own chair, welcomed her through his interpreter,
Alférez Mathias de Marmolexo. She responded very courteously to the
courtesies of the governor; for the Moro woman is very intelligent,
and of great capacity. She did not speak directly to the interpreters,
but through two of her men, one of whom was the kasis; and often he,
without the queen speaking, answered to what was proposed. The queen
petitioned and entreated the governor to desist from entering the
stronghold, for the women, being timid creatures, feared the soldiers
greatly. And if his Lordship was doing it to oblige her and the king
her husband to descend, she said that they would descend immediately,
with all their people. Thus did she entreat from him whom his Lordship
represented; and I desired that she should obtain this favor. His
Lordship answered her that he would do so very willingly; but that he
had an express mandate for it [i.e., to gain the fort] from his king,
and that, if he did not obey it, he would lose his head. "I do not
wish," said Tuan Baluka (for such is the name of the queen), "that
the favor which I petition be at so great a price and danger to your
Lordship. Consequently, will you kindly grant me three days? and in
that time I, the king, and our people will descend without fail." His
Lordship thanked her anew, and added that with this she obliged him
to fulfil strictly what he had promised her. "Indeed," said the queen,
"I have no doubt of it; for, being in the gaze of so many nations that
your Lordship has to conquer, it is clear that you must fulfil what
you have promised me; for your Lordship's actions toward me would
be understood by all to be those that you would have to perform
toward all." This terminated the discussion. His Lordship ordered
a collation to be spread for the queen and her ladies; and then his
Lordship retired, so that they might refresh themselves without any
embarrassment. Then, having dined, the queen returned to her stronghold
with the retinue that she had brought. Before she left the quarters
she was saluted by the discharge of two large pieces of artillery,
which had been made ready for that purpose. She was greatly pleased
by that, and the next day began to carry out her promises, by sending
down a portion of her possessions. The Makassars and Malays also
brought down their property with her, and immediately embarked. I
had written up to this point to this day, Saturday, the seventeenth
of this month of April, hoping for the end of all these incipient
results and expected events regarding this stronghold; the issue has
been such as we could expect from Him who has also been pleased to
arrange and bring it to pass. Last night the queen came down to sleep
in our camp or quarters, with some of her ladies. In the morning she
went to report her good treatment to her people; for she was received
with a salute of musketry and large artillery, and a fine repast. All
that has been done to oblige her to encourage her people, for they
were very fearful, to descend immediately. More than two thousand
have now descended, and our banners are flying on the hill, and our
men are fortified on it. May God be praised, to whom be a thousand
thanks given; for He, without our knowledge or our expectations, has
disposed this matter thus--blinding this Moro and disheartening him,
so that, having been defeated, he should surrender to our governor, and
give himself up without more bloodshed. We are trying to secure Datu
Ache; if we succeed in this, I shall advise you. Now there is nothing
more to say, reverend Father, except to give God the thanks, for He
is the one who has prepared and given this victory to us; and to beg
all in your Reverence's holy college to give thanks that the college
has had (as I am very certain) so great a share in the achievements
[here]. The governor is very much pleased and we all regard him in the
proper light. The men are full of courage, and even what was carefully
done is now improved. I am the humble servant of your Reverence whom
I pray that God may preserve as I desire, and to whose sacrifices I
earnestly commend myself. Jolo, April 17, 1638.--Juan de Barrios.

All the Sulus descended, in number about four thousand six hundred,
to the sea. Finding themselves down and outside the enclosure, they
all fled, under cover of a very heavy shower of rain--leaving all
their possessions, in order not to be hindered in their flight. Many
mothers even abandoned their little children. One abandoned to us a
little girl who had received a dagger-stroke, who received the waters
of baptism and immediately died. There is much to say about this, and
many thanks to give to God, of which we shall speak when it pleases
God to let us see each other. Today, the nineteenth of this month of
April, 1638.--Barrios.

The governor sent messages to the king and queen by two kasis,
asking why they had fled. They replied that since all their people
had fled, they had gone after them for very shame, but that they
would try to bring them back and to come, and this was the end of the
matter. The result was exceedingly profitable for our soldiers and
Indians; for the Sulus, fearful because they thought that, if they
became scattered, they would all be killed, abandoned whatever they
were carrying--quantities of goods, and chests of drawers--which our
soldiers sacked. Above, in the stronghold, they found much plunder. It
is believed that the king and queen will return, but not Datu Ache;
but this is not considered certain.


LETTER FROM SANBOANGAN [261]

PAX CHRISTI

I am not writing to anyone [else], for the lack of time does not allow
me to do so. Therefore will your Reverence please communicate this to
the father provincial, Father Hernandez Perez, Father Juan de Bueras,
and the father rector of Cavite.

When our men were most disheartened at seeing that the fortress on
the hill was so extensive, and that it was becoming stronger daily;
that the mines and artillery had seemingly made no impression on it;
that we had been repulsed four times; and that our men were falling
sick very rapidly: in order that it might be very evident that it
was [all] the work of God, ambassadors came from the hill to beg his
Lordship for mercy. He received them gladly, and asked them for the
artillery that they had plundered from the Christians, etc. They
brought down four pieces, which they had taken from the shipyard,
and brought to us some Christians. Next day, more than one hundred
and fifty people from Basilan descended, who surrendered their arms,
and then about fifty Makassars, who did the same; and all were embarked
in the patache.

Next day the king and queen went down and slept in the camp of Don
Sebastian. On the following day (which was the day agreed upon when
all were to descend from the hill), seeing that it was already late,
the king and queen said that they would go to get their people. The
governor granted them permission, and went to a camp that was located
opposite the gate of the stronghold. All the Sulus descended, carrying
their goods, arms, etc., to the number of about four hundred soldiers,
and more than one thousand five hundred women, children, old men,
etc. They reached the governor's camp and Don Pedro de Francia told
the king that they must surrender their arms. The latter replied that
he would surrender them to none other than to the governor. Thereupon,
they went to summon his Lordship; but the Sulus, seeing that they were
going to summon him, fled, under a heavy shower that was falling,
and abandoned all their goods. A vast amount of riches, many pieces
of artillery, and versos, [262] falcons, muskets, arquebuses, etc.,
were found. The cause of the Moros fleeing was their great fear that
they were to be killed. On our part, since Don Sebastian Hurtado held
all their stronghold, and had left only thirty men in his quarters
(in order that Datu Ache might not escape), and as that number could
not resist so many people, the Sulus were, on the contrary, allowed
to go without any firearms being discharged.

More than two hundred and fifty of the Sulus have died, and they
were perishing in great numbers from dysentery because the women and
children were placed under ground for fear of the balls. That and the
fear of the mines caused their surrender; for it was impossible to
take their fort by assault. The interior strength of that stronghold
is so great that the Spaniards were surprised; and all recognize
that it has been totally the work of God, and [a result of] the
perseverance of Don Sebastian, who ever said that all must die or
capture the stronghold. Somewhat more than two hundred Christian and
more than one hundred Moro women have come from the stronghold during
this time. All the Moro women are fearful. Up to date eighty-three
Spaniards have died from wounds, and many of them from disease.


    THE KILLED

    Sargento-mayor Melon
    Captain Don Pedro de Mena
    Captain Don Juan Nicolas
    Captain Don Pimienta
    Captain Don Lope Suarez


    DIED OF DYSENTERY

    Captain Don Aregita Martin de Avila
    Adjutant Oliba
    Adjutant Calderon
    Alférez Concha
    Alférez Alonzo Gonzalez


I shall not name others, as they are not so well known, and it will be
known later. Up to date about two hundred Bisayan Indians have died,
most of them from diseases. Don Pedro Cotoan died while en route from
Jolo to Samboanga, in order to take back the Bisayans, who are a most
cowardly race. Those who have done deeds of valor are the Karagas,
and the Sulus tremble at sight of them. Don Pedro Almonte remains as
governor and lieutenant for the captain-general at Samboangan, with one
hundred and fifty Spaniards, as has been reported. Captain Jines Ros is
to stay as castellan in Jolo with one hundred and eighty men--Captain
Sarria being fortified in the stronghold with eighty men, and Jines
Ros on the beach in a stone tower that is already eight stones high,
with one hundred men. Captain Marquez is going to Buaren with fifty
Spaniards, although no succor had been sent to Don Sebastian from
Manila. All that has been supplied to excess is truly wonderful,
for the winds have brought (and it is incredible) many champanes,
with more than twenty thousand baskets of rice, innumerable fowls,
and pork, veal, beef, and cheeses from Cebu, which have made a very
excellent provision.

They ask for Father Martinez [and] Alexandro at Jolo [and] Father
Carrion at Buiaon, but without an associate. I say that, following
even to the end of the world, I do not know to what to compare these
Moros of Samboangan. They have paid all their tributes. This is a brief
relation. I pray your Reverence to pardon me and commend me to God,
for indeed what I desire is necessary.


Samboangan, April 23, 1638. [263]


APPENDIX VII

OBANDO'S REPORT ON THE PREPARATIONS TO BE UNDERTAKEN TO RETURN ALIMUD
DIN TO SULU, JULY 15, 1751 [264]


Sire: Your Majesty will find in the enclosed report the resolutions
adopted by the Committees of the War and Treasury Departments for
the purpose of reinstating the king of Sulu, Fernando the First,
whom I found in this capital, baptized and protected by Royal briefs
insuring him the continuation of the same Royal goodwill as long as
he remained a Christian and a friend of the nation, which seems to be
his intention hitherto, with the help of 3 galleys, 3 barges, 1 galiot,
2 large champanes and other craft for war and transportation, under the
orders of the Master-of-camp of your Majesty's infantry here, to whom
I have given the instructions and orders contained in said report,
to the effect that he should make port at Zamboanga, and from there
try to subdue the rebel vassals, blockade the island of Sulu by sea,
cut it off from all communication with its neighbors, prevent food from
being introduced, prevent and punish all depredations, acts of piracy
and insults on the part of that barbarous nation against the town and
vassals of your Majesty of which I receive pitiful complaints every
day, and see that the captives are returned and that due observance
is given the treaties of peace and other agreements which were made
by my predecessor but have not proved to be as satisfactory as might
have been hoped, on account of the inconstancy which characterizes
that nation.

Before undertaking such an important operation, I decided to order
the construction of three average sized galleys, and other small
vessels, of which there were none in these Islands; and to arm them
I ordered to be cast 100 perrier cannon of calibre 2, with three
chambers each, ordering the transfer to the province of Iloilo of
General Francisco Domingo Oscoti, as Lieutenant-Intendant-General,
with instructions to prepare provisions at the smallest cost for the
Treasury, and directing him to issue a proclamation (as he did) calling
for volunteers, who would be rewarded according to their merits on the
ships plying between Manila and Acapulco, and authorizing the natives
to arm boats at their expense, exempting them of all taxes during
the expedition. As I was in possession of a rescript of your Majesty
addressed to his Field Marshal my predecessor Gaspar de la Torre,
ordering him to reconnoiter the island of Balabak, and Ipolote Bay,
and other places of Palawan Island for the purpose of building a fort
for the protection of the inhabitants against the people of Sulu,
Tiron and Borneo, and to build six galleys with which to fight the
Moros, with a report on the same object presented by the Province
of Saint Nicholas of these Islands, [265] both of which have been
communicated to said Committees of the War and Treasury Departments
and to persons who had knowledge by experience of the said province
and regions; also, in view of the poor condition of the Royal treasury
which precluded the possibility of greater expenses it was decided,
in accordance with the opinion of your Majesty's Fiscal [Attorney
General] in regard to the above mentioned instruments, to incorporate
them to said report (or record), [266] as they are of the same nature,
to take, when there was a better opportunity, the proper measures for
reconnoitering the most favorable position for the intended fort,
and to await the result of the expedition for the reinstatement
of the king of Sulu, so as to request him, if the result should be
favorable, to withdraw his vassals from the fort of Ipolote, and,
if not, to secure the safety of the people of the said island by
driving them out; and having already ordered, as I have said, the
construction of the galleys, which were necessary and made more so
by your Royal order, to continue the work until the six were built,
said work being carried on with the utmost care and economy, which
I always bear in mind in my zeal for the service of your Majesty.

I will send your Majesty full reports on the progress of these
different undertakings, so that your Royal orders may let me know
your Royal pleasure, which will always meet with my humble obedience.

God give the Royal and Catholic Person of your Majesty the many years
of life which are required by Christendom for the happiness of your
vast dominions.


Manila, July 15, 1751.


APPENDIX VIII

OBANDO'S REPORT ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING THE ATTEMPT TO RETURN
ALIMUD DIN TO SULU, JUNE 18, 1752 [267]


Sire: In a letter addressed to your Majesty last year, 1751,
I forwarded a report and vouchers to the effect that I had sent,
with the King of Sulu, Fernando the First, to the fortified station
of Zamboanga, a fleet of 3 galleys, two feluccas, two galiots and two
large champanes, with other craft, under the Master-of-camp [268] of
the Royal troops here, for the purpose of restoring said king to his
throne and forcing his rebel vassals to submit, by means of a blockade
of the island of Sulu, which would cut it off from all communication
with its neighbors and prevent the importation of food to the island,
other provisions being made for the purpose of protecting the Christian
communities against any further harm on the part of the Sulu people
and the Tirons. [269] I have the honor to report now that the said
Master-of-camp arrived at Zamboanga with most of the fleet, ahead of
the Sultan of Sulu, who had been delayed by various accidents, and
sailed at once, in order to avoid the monsoon, for the Bay of Jolo,
where he anchored on the 26th of June of that year, at about one mile
from the forts. He formed a line of battle, and, noticing two Chinese
champanes without flags, that were stationed near the river mouth and
were stretching two lines to go up stream, he ordered two long-boats
to go and remove them from under the artillery of the enemy; the Jolo
forts, four in number, displayed red banners and opened fire with
cannon of calibre 8 to 18 on the boats towing the champanes; our fleet
answered, and the fire was kept up some time on both sides, until the
enemy hoisted the white flag in order to gain time for reënforcing his
trenches; the Master-of-camp sent a letter to Prince Asin, informing
him that his only purpose was to restore the legitimate king of Sulu
to his dominions, and to have the captives delivered; the prince
answered that he had no captives to deliver; that he was waiting for
the return of the king, who would do as he wished with them, that he
was begging the Prophet to send back the king * * *. Finding such an
answer vain and impertinent, our ships opened fire again; a suburb
was stormed and burned, and our men found out that the negotiations
were a pretext to gain time to place artillery behind the palisades;
the Moros accomplished this purpose and again requested a truce in
order to hold a meeting of their leaders and to deliberate as to
what should be done. This was granted, and in a second letter signed
by the Datus Prince Asin insisted that the Master-of-camp should
retire to Zamboanga, promising to bring over the captives; as the
south-west monsoon was blowing hard and he was short of provisions,
the latter decided to go back to Zamboanga; the Datus informed their
king Fernando in a letter addressed to him at Zamboanga of what had
been agreed; Prince Asin also stated verbally that he would bring to
Zamboanga some captives whom he was going to seek in the woods, and
asked the Master to leave the port, while he went after the wives and
children of the followers of King Fernando, who had been frightened and
scattered by the artillery. After a few more answers and objections
which showed an utter lack of sincerity, the Master-of-camp sailed
back to Zamboanga. The King of Sulu had arrived there on June 22,
and as soon as he heard about the truce requested by his brother
Asin, and other affairs of the fleet, he declared that the prince
was his enemy. This statement was believed at the time, but soon
afterwards good-sized boats began to arrive one after the other
with many of his principal people on the pretext of Prince Asin's
visit to the King, until there were 180 persons, including 32 women
between concubines and servants. When the Master-of-camp, Governor
of Zamboanga, remarked that all these boats were full of firearms,
powder, ball, coats of mail, helmets, and other warlike equipment,
that the King of Sulu had secretly sent to his brother Asin, at
Basilan, golden buckles and epaulets, and embroidered stockings to
make a brilliant appearance at landing in Zamboanga, while he feigned
to be his enemy; that Prince Asin had failed to keep his word, since
he said that he had been unable to get hold of the captives he was to
bring to Zamboanga, when it was known that he was keeping the said
captives in a secret place, six of them, including a woman, having
escaped by swimming over to the fleet when the latter was at Jolo,
and reported that the Moros had many captives concealed in the woods;
that Prince Asin had written to the King that all the captives seized
during the latter's stay in Manila were still in their power, not
one having been sold while awaiting the royal commands; and finally,
that the King and his brother were secretly dismissing the concubines
only, telling them that the Master-of-camp was sending them away with
contumely; he inferred that the King was preparing to surprise the
fort. This surmise was strengthened by the face that armed men were
steadily coming in each day, despite the Master-of-camp's friendly
admonition to the King that his followers enter the fort unarmed. The
lying and disingenuousness of the King, which all these indications
were making plainer every moment, were finally betrayed by a letter,
written in Arabic characters, to the King of Mindanao, in which he
stated that he had been compelled, by those in whose power he was,
to write the letter he had previously sent him from Manila,--whereas
he had enjoyed complete freedom in this capital, so complete, in
fact, that he did not perform, during the voyage hence to Zamboanga,
a single rite of the Christian religion, as far as known, while he
was seen to perform various Moro religious acts, and took with him
the Quran in his own language, instead of the numerous Catholic
books which had been given him for his instruction. In view of all
the foregoing evidence of bad faith, the Master-of-camp, Governor of
Zamboanga, and the captains of the fleet decided to arrest at the same
time the King, the datus and their men, to seize their boats, arms,
and concealed ammunition, and to keep the whole under careful guard,
the men being detained in decent quarters, pending the decision of
the Captain-General.

In reflecting on this important and critical change in the situation,
I bore in mind that the said King of Sulu had been a false friend
and a consummate Machiavellian, who had deceived your Majesty's
Governor Fernando Valdes Tamon with his feigned promises of peace,
which he never kept, and that, instead of releasing the captives and
preventing the cruel outrages of his vassals the Moros and Tirons,
he had used the considerable supply of arms, which he received
from the said Governor and Governor Gaspar de la Torre under the
pretence of suppressing supposed rebellions of his vassals, to keep
our forces busy in Sulu, so that his vassals the Tiron pirates might
ravage the provinces, while our forces were engaged in the Sulu
kingdom. He also deceived your Majesty's Governor and Bishop when
a fleet was sent against the Tirons; he went as an ally and a pilot
for the fleet among the shallows, and the small islands belonging to
the enemy, and prevented the destruction of the principal towns, by
misrepresenting to the commander of the expedition that said towns
belonged to peaceful people who were friends of his, and pledging
himself to have the prisoners returned, so that the fleet retired
after burning only nine villages without importance, thanks to the
cunning of the king. The trouble caused by all these Moros, thanks
to his influence, is really astounding, and has nearly drained the
Royal treasury, as, since the last peace agreement made by Governor
Tamon, 89,744 pesos have been spent from 1736 to 1740, and since then
the war expenses have far exceeded that amount. All these criminal
and astute antecedents fully justify my distrust in giving careful
instructions to the Master-of-camp to avoid a surprise of the fort
under the veil of feigned friendship; I really expected this new act
of treason on account of what I already knew about the said King of
Sulu, and was only held back by the fact that he had been baptized,
and the information about him which my predecessor had given me in
good faith. As it is, all the members of the Government were glad
that the treachery of the King had been foreseen and that he had been
arrested. * * *

In Zamboanga, after his arrest, 12 krises, each in six pieces,
were found hidden in two cushions belonging to him. * * * Urged
by the members of the ministry, I proceeded at once to explain to
the Real Acuerdo [270] and the council of war all the difficulty of
inflicting the condign punishment that was deserved, and, supported by
a majority of votes, I decided to declare war on all the Sulus, Tirons
and Kamukons, with the understanding that no capitulations or treaties
of peace would be considered, but that they would be treated as rebels,
in their persons, their property and their land, and put to the sword
in case of resistance; that all their towns would be destroyed and
burned; and that the mission of our fleet was not to make conquests,
but to punish the rebellion and to blockade the island of Sulu so as
to prevent any attempt to bring in food or any other help. I also
directed that the King of Sulu, who was under arrest at Zamboanga,
should be sent to Manila, there to be kept in confinement until the
pleasure of your Majesty be known. The Datus and other Moros were
declared to be slaves, and I ordered that they should be branded and
marked, not so much for the purpose of guaranteeing the ownership of
their masters or punishing their obstinacy, as for that of avoiding
all confusion between them and the numerous Indians of these Islands,
whom they resemble in color, bearing and language, of crushing their
pride, their daring and their evil spirit, experience having shown
that 8 Sulus suffice to subjugate a whole town, and principally
of preventing the clandestine introduction of the sect of Mohammed,
which would easily spread among the Indians, if the brand did not mark
them as enemies from Sulu, it being known that the sect of Mohammed
is daily extending its darkness over these regions. * * *

The declaration of war against the Moros was published in all the
provinces, which were instructed to be constantly ready for attack
or defense; to organize companies of militia, with their officers,
in all the pueblos, and have them frequently drilled and reviewed, so
as to become skilful in the use of their arms; to send a list of all
the arms and ammunition on hand to the Captain-General, who will thus
be able to supply them with all he may deem necessary. I furthermore
ordered that no boat should leave Manila or any other port without
being well provided with men and arms, and issued proclamations calling
for privateers, several of whom have already been given letters of
marque and have sailed with the hope of doing good service for your
Majesty; I issued new instructions on every subject, to be followed
in their respective parts according to circumstances; I reserved for
my future action the disposal of our prisoners at the best terms,
one fifth of the profits going to the Royal treasury; the right of
plundering was declared to be free for all, all privateers from the
Bisayas were exempted from tribute, and I promised them in the name
of your Majesty 6 pesos for each Moro, as an encouragement to pursue
and exterminate them. As soon as I heard the news from Zamboanga,
I sent there a supply boat with plenty of food, arms and soldiers,
in view of the next campaign; I took on myself the care of relieving
from time to time the officers and soldiers * * * and I can sincerely
assure your Majesty that I have been so provoked and exasperated
by the untamable fierceness and the bad faith of the Moros, that I
am decided to spare neither work nor efforts in order to punish them
thoroughly and to deliver from oppression the Christian communities, so
that the glorious name of your Majesty may be feared and respected all
through my Government, in compensation for the gross deceit practised
by said Moros upon my predecessors. I trust, with the help of God,
to punish them as they deserve, and will report to your Majesty the
progress of the expedition.

God keep the Catholic and Royal Person of your Majesty many years,
as Christendom and the Monarchy have need.


Manila, June 18, 1752.


APPENDIX IX

REPORT ON THE OCCUPATION OF PALAWAN AND BALABAK, APRIL 30, 1753 [271]


Sire: By letter forwarded to your Majesty through confidential channels
under date of * * * I reported that I had despatched an embassador to
the King of Bruney, informing him of the arrest of the King of Sulu for
his inveterate faithlessness, and pressing him to continue our long
standing friendship and to form a new alliance against the said king
as a usurper of part of his dominions, and against all his enemies,
and to cede to your Majesty the Island of Balabak and the territory
of Palawan, for the purpose of better waging war against the Sulus,
Tirons and Kamukons; and that, the desired end having been obtained,
I found it necessary to use the new rights acquired by the cession
referred to. Consequently, with the view of best promoting your
Majesty's interests, I resolved to put into execution the idea of
an armament composed of our galleys, a tender, three feluccas, and
two champanes, supplied with two Spanish companies of one hundred
men each, together with another company of Pampanga Indians, which,
with the crews, the convicts and the military officers, number nearly
a thousand persons, for the glorious object of taking possession of La
Pampanga in the ceded part of Balabak and the other adjacent islands,
forming this new district into a province called Trinidad, with a
separate government from that of the Kalamians; for I have appointed
a governor to take charge of nourishing this new plantation with the
political regulations and Royal ordinances which the prudent zeal of
your Majesty has provided for similar cases, and which, on my part,
have been furnished him in the form of brief and clear instructions
directed towards civilizing those barbarous natives, so as the better
to facilitate the spread of the holy Gospel.

With this in view I am sending two reverend Jesuit priests, persons
distinguished in politics and mathematical learning, and the military
engineer of this place, for the purpose of making an inspection of
the capital of Palawan, as well as of the Island of Balabak, and its
adjacent islands, and of examining their bays, ports, inlets, rivers,
anchorages and depths, in order to construct a fort--which will be
named after Our Lady of the Good End--in the most healthful location,
secure by land as well as by sea, for the garrisoning of which an
adequate force of artillery has been despatched. It will be kept
guarded for the present by a small galley, two feluccas, a company of
Spaniards, and another company of Pampanga Indians, besides the galley
slaves [272] and the suite of the governor, and officials--all rationed
for one year--who will number three hundred, the rest being returned to
this capital when possession is once established. And that the taking
of possession may be unopposed, useful, and lasting, I have planned for
the strengthening of the said fort, with the primary object of having
our troops sally from its walls to pacify the Sulu rebels who have
been dwelling in certain districts of Palawan, or to exterminate them
completely by fire and sword, preventing by means of the new fortress
and the little flying squadron, the Kamukons, Tirons, and others, from
laying waste the province of the Kalamians, and the adjacent islands;
for, there being access to the entire chain of places and all the
islands, facilitating attacks, and our vessels being on a constant
cruise through those regions, their expulsion will be secured. But
the greatest gain of all will lie in becoming acquainted with their
lands, rendezvous and places of refuge, in view of the fact that the
greatest defense which they have had up to the present time has been
our own ignorance and negligence in the premises, they scorning our
arms without fear, in the belief that they are unconquerable because
the places of their abode are unexplored; wherefore the King of Sulu,
pretending to serve us as a pilot among the Tiron Islands laughed at
our expedition under the command of your Majesty's Reverend Bishop of
Nueva Segovia, leading the Spaniards about with a halter wherever he
wished, and wherever he thought they would suffer most fatigue. In
view of all this, and of our present experience of the unbridled
audacity with which they ravage almost all the provinces, I felt
compelled to project this campaign of reconnaissance so as to test,
by the favorable results secured, the surest means of benefiting these
Christian communities, for I am in hopes of establishing, through this
new colony, an impregnable bulwark against the whole Moro power and
a source of reciprocal assistance to the fortress at Zamboanga. And
I likewise propose to introduce into those parts, by reason of their
proximity, commerce with Borneo, Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin-China,
so that, through intercourse, the inhabitants of Palawan may become
pacified and tractable and their towns become opulent; so that with
the families which in due time will be drafted from the outskirts
of this capital, a province of substantial usefulness may be formed,
having greater respect for both Majesties; for, by erecting churches
to God, a new gem will be added to the Royal crown, namely the glory
of giving many souls to the Lord, while the savings of the Royal
treasury will in time be appreciable.

Although I intended to make this journey personally, the noble city
[273] and the majority of the committee on war opposed this course,
and with the sanction of the Audiencia convened in executive session
I decided to delegate my authority for this act, in view of the
necessity of my remaining in the capital for the despatch of the
urgent and arduous affairs which frequently present themselves.

God guard the Royal Catholic Person of your Majesty the many years
that Christendom needs him.


Manila, April 30, 1753.


APPENDIX X

BRIEF REPORT ON THE EXPEDITION TO TAKE POSSESSION OF PALAWAN, JULY 17,
1753 [274]


Sire: When the galleon was on the point of sailing for New Spain,
the Palawan expedition returned to the port of Cavite, from where
the commander of the expedition informs me that he has made a careful
and exact survey of the Islands of Palawan and Balabak, beginning on
the outward coast, from 9 degrees to Labo. On all that coast he has
only found mangrove swamps and reefs, the inhabitants being hostile
to everyone and obeying no king; the land is miserably poor; there is
no drinking water from Balabak to Ipolote; the climate is so bad that
in two months and a half 116 men of the expedition died and 200 were
sick, and he finds that all that has been said about Palawan is false.

I have also been informed by the Alcalde Mayor of the Kalamians of the
arrival there of one galley, and three feluccas, which had left the
fleet since it sailed from Manila, as the Commander also now reports;
after the galley had been careened and food provided, one felucca
sailed on its course convoying the joanga [275] of the father prior
in charge of that district and two small vessels which had been sent
by the Alcalde of Komboy and had suffered the misfortune of being
captured by the Sulu Moros, most of the people, however, escaping,
as explained in the enclosed letter from the Alcalde.

The commander of the expedition has sent me from Cavite a report of
the councils of war held by him for the purpose of carrying out his
instructions, the most important of which was to take possession
of Palawan and adjacent islands in the name of your Majesty, said
islands having been ceded by the King of Bruney; accordingly, our
fleet took possession of the land with due solemnity, with the express
knowledge and consent of the inhabitants; I also received a log of
the whole route which seems to have been well kept, with maps and
a full explanation of the examination made of the said islands and
the operations in connection therewith. A new map of the islands is
being made, on account of the errors contained in the former one; as
the log and the report of the commander refer to the new map, which
is unfinished, and I cannot delay the departure of the galleon, I
cannot forward a full report to your Majesty; I wish to make a serious
and careful examination of all that has been done, so as to take
such action as may be the best for the benefit of the Royal service,
and to be able to send your Majesty a full report of the expedition,
with my opinion based on a complete knowledge of the facts. This is
all the information I can give your Majesty for the present.

God keep the Catholic Royal Person, of your Majesty many years,
as Christendom has need.


Manila, July 17, 1753.


APPENDIX XI

LETTER OF THE KING OF SPAIN TO SULTAN ISRAEL, DECEMBER 2, 1774 [276]


To the Captain-General of the Philippine Islands.


Most illustrious Sir: In letters Nos. 322 and 325, your Excellency sets
forth the ideas of the English settled in the island of Balambangan,
who are displeased with the unhealthfulness of the country and petition
that the Sultan of Sulu allow them to settle within his dominions.

With No. 325, the letter of the Sultan was received, and the King, thus
informed of the attempts of the Englishmen, and also of the favorable
inclination of the Sulu Sultan to establish with our nation friendship
and alliance, commands me to direct you to listen to his proposals,
to accede to them whenever they are reasonable, and to grant him aid
and favor as far as possible, assuring him of Royal protection, and
delivering to him the enclosed communication in answer to his own, in
which his Catholic Majesty declares his entire satisfaction with his
reasonable conduct and promises to reciprocate his friendship as you
may understand through the copy of that letter which I enclose. God
preserve your Excellency many years.


Madrid, December 5, 1774.

Dr. Julian de Biriaga.


[Copy of the communication referred to in the foregoing letter.]

Most illustrious and excellent prince Mohammed Israel, Sultan
of Sulu. Most gratifying has been to me the announcement, which
you conveyed to me in your letter of January 20th, of your happy
accession to the sovereignty of Sulu, on account of which I offer
you many congratulations, wishing you happiness in all things.

The disposition which inclines you to seek my friendship and
assistance, as also the friendly relations which you maintain with
my Governor of the Philippines, which you desire to establish and
perpetuate by means of a mutual agreement, which may secure for the
future firm peace and a perpetual alliance between your states and
mine, increase my just gratification, especially as my Governor has
informed me of the sublime natural gifts which are united in your
person, with many and most expressive eulogies thereof.

In view of this, and of the constant fidelity which you promise in
your letter, I command my good vassal, Don Simon de Anda y Salazar, to
listen to your proposals, to accede to them whenever reasonable, and to
grant you all the favor and assistance which the forces and facilities
to be found there may allow assuring you of my Royal protection, which
I extend to you from now on, confiding in your reciprocal friendship,
and noble conduct, and desirous of opportunities of favoring you and
of proving the interest which I feel in your good fortunes and the
earnestness with which I pray God to preserve you many years.


Madrid, December 2, 1774.

I, the King.


APPENDIX XII

LETTER FROM THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL OF THE PHILIPPINES FORWARDING A COPY
OF THE TREATY OF PEACE, PROTECTION, AND COMMERCE WITH SULU, DECEMBER
25, 1836 [277]


Superior Government of the Philippines

Most Excellent Sir: After having reported to your Excellency in my
three former communications, the opinion which I have formed with
regard to the countries in the vicinity of our possessions in the
southern part of the Philippines, of the relations which we ought
to sustain with their governments and the policy we should follow
until we shall obtain the immense advantages which our position
offers us, I have the honor to deliver to your Excellency a copy of
the Capitulations of the Treaty of Peace, Protection, and Commerce,
which I have concluded through the captain of frigate, Don José María
Halcon, with the Sultan and Datus of Sulu.

The articles which need some explanation, are the 1st, 3rd and
4th. With reference to the 3rd and 4th, I mention them in my former
communication and indicate their intent; and with respect to the 1st,
I copy herewith what has been reported to me by the commissioner,
D. José María Halcon, which is as follows:


    I must make clear an important point relating to the text of the
    Capitulations, in the wording of which your Excellency has noted
    perhaps some ambiguities and omissions in Article I, which while
    intended to make the Datus and Sultan of Sulu acknowledge and
    declare the extent of our rights, seems indefinite on certain
    points which many irresponsible writers have asserted with
    confidence.

    While considering the protection granted the Sultan, I recognized
    the inexpediency of making the same include the lands which he has
    lately acquired in Borneo, and of determining definitely the line
    of the boundary in Palawan, the title to which island, as also that
    to Balabak and Balambangan, is very disputable, though at present,
    the lands where we have not established our settlements of the
    province of Kalamians are included de facto in his possessions.

    Palawan was ceded to the Crown of Spain by the King of Bruney,
    and Balabak is likewise ceded by an instrument brought back by
    D. Antonio Fabean when he went there as Embassador under the
    administration of the Marquis of Obando, which should be in the
    archives of the Philippine Government; but since these cessions
    were made on an occasion when the Sultan of Sulu found himself
    in possession of the lands by virtue of a former cession made in
    his favor by another King of Bruney, such documentary testimony
    cannot serve as the basis of our arguments, especially since we
    did not proceed to found any settlements.

    This matter of the cession of Balabak occurred upon the occasion
    of a visit to Manila, of Sultan Mohammed Alimud Din (Fernando I)
    who, asserting his right to the island, executed and ratified upon
    his part the gift, at least in word, through D. Manuel Fernandez
    Toribio, afterward Governor of Zamboanga, and the Secretary of
    the Government.

    Our writers have misrepresented the subsequent conduct of the
    said Sultan, and concealed very important facts, but at any rate,
    the very concealment of the reasons for his fleeing from Manila
    betokens the lack of liberty in all of the instruments he granted
    during his stay in that place; moreover the facts in the case
    justify his later actions, which gave occasion for casting a doubt
    over the legitimacy of our title to the lands under consideration.

    The true reason for the actions of Mohammed Alimud Din, beginning
    with his flight from Manila, was the fact that he had purchased
    the secret in a copy of the confidential letter which the First
    Minister of the Monarchy, Marquis de la Ensenada, wrote to the
    Captain-General of the Philippines on August 28, 1751, discussing
    the states of Sulu; which document, when brought to his knowledge,
    could not fail to ruin all of our political moves, and to dispose
    him to take every defensive measure against our power, for Mohammed
    Alimud Din was a man of no mean understanding.

    This was the origin of the letters which, on September 17, 1763,
    the said Sultan wrote from Sulu to the King of England and to
    the English company, [278] ratifying in favor of the latter
    the concession of the lands which form the strait of Balabak,
    in which is comprised the southern part of Palawan from Point
    Kanipaan to Point Bulilaruan, and this was the origin of their
    settlements in Balabak and Balambangan which have been abandoned
    since later events.

    Such are the antecedents which induced me to draw up the said
    article with such ambiguity that it may be construed to the
    advantage of the Crown without giving occasion to embarrassing
    objections.

    My aim throughout, most illustrious Sir, has been to promote
    the national welfare by carrying out the high designs of your
    Excellency, who by promoting this enterprise has attempted to open
    up one of the most abundant sources of wealth in the Philippines.


I also deliver to your Excellency a copy of the Capitulations, in
which, in consequence of Article 2nd, it has been agreed to determine
the duties to be paid by the Sulu vessels in Zamboanga and Manila,
and ours in Sulu. For the better understanding of these stipulations,
I have thought it expedient to inclose a copy of the explanation with
which the said commissioner forwarded them to me.

The present tariff rates have served as a basis for the duties
imposed upon the Sulu vessels, it being beyond my authority to
alter them. With reference to those which shall be paid by our
vessels in Joló, although they may appear to be excessive, it will
be sufficient to inform your Excellency that all of the ship-owners
who are accustomed to make voyages to Joló, have been satisfied with
the very favorable terms we have secured in the agreement, not only
because of the high valuation set on the articles in which payment
will be made, but because of the regulation and reduction to fixed
rules of the charges, that until now have been arbitrary and never
less than the stipulated rates. It is true that they have desired not
only a greater reduction but still more their complete abolition,
as is natural, but it was necessary to conciliate the two parties,
as the commissioner says.

Above all, one of the advantages of importance which our merchants
recognize in the relations now established, the benefits of which
they have begun already to experience, is that the Sultan and Datus
together guarantee the credits left in Sulu as a result of commercial
operations, which advantage they have not heretofore enjoyed,
but waited on the will and good faith of the debtor, who paid if he
pleased and when he pleased, or perhaps never, and there existed no
means of compelling him as there now is by recourse to the Government.

Likewise through the preference they are now accorded, our merchants
have gained greatly, as your Excellency will comprehend. In short,
there is not one of them who is not well satisfied with the results
of the negotiations, and all appreciate the skill and prudence with
which Halcon has conducted himself upon a mission all the more delicate
and difficult since he has had to treat with a Government whose lack
of enlightenment and poorness of organization equal the barbarism of
its people.

Finally, in the answer given by the Chamber of Commerce of which I
inclose a copy, your Excellency will perceive the appreciation which
the Capitulations have brought him, by having settled the duties to be
paid by our vessels in Sulu, as also by having established relations
with the Government of that island.

I trust that your Excellency will condescend to bring all this to
the notice of her Majesty that she may grant her Royal approval.

God preserve your Excellency many years.


Manila, December 25, 1836.

Most excellent Sir,

(Sgd.) Pedro Antonio Salazar.--Rubricated.

The most excellent the Secretary of State and of the Office of
"Gobernación" of the Kingdom.


APPENDIX XIII

ROYAL DIRECTIONS RELATIVE TO A GENERAL POLICY AND THE REGULATION OF
COMMERCE WITH SULU, AND THE ADVISABILITY OF MAKING ZAMBOANGA A FREE
PORT, JUNE 23, 1837 [279]


Ministry of the Navy, Commerce, and Colonial Administration

Most Excellent Sir: Your Excellency's predecessor, Don Pedro Antonio
Salazar, when he reported in detail, in letters of last December,
all that he had done in the treaty of friendship and commerce
entered into with the Sultan of Sulu, of the mercantile relations
which it behooves us to maintain with the Mohammedan possessions to
the south of the Philippines, of the opinion which he had formed
concerning the war of enslavement, and other matters upon which
your Excellency will receive due instructions under Royal order
of this date, forwarded separately and privately, in a very secret
manner, a communication dated the 17th of the same month, in which
he set forth the policy, which, according to his belief, should be
adopted toward the said Kingdom of Sulu in consequence of the said
treaty. Her Majesty the Queen Regent, having been informed of all
this, and having in mind the remark made in the said communication,
that the Spanish possessions in the southern region are frequently
oppressed by the alcaldes, on account of the present defective system
of administration, has decided to direct your Excellency to suppress,
with strong hand, these excesses of the alcaldes, that they may not
disturb the peace happily established with Sulu; exhorting them to
moderation and peaceableness, in order that the odium which the Moro
race feels toward us may vanish. Noting also among his remarks, his
conclusion that while the war of enslavement is undoubtedly an evil,
it produces nevertheless the advantage that those provinces are united
more closely to the Government because of their greater need of the
same against their enemies; and that by becoming used to a life of
freedom and license, those people become also inured to captivity,
from which they could sometimes escape but do not, many preferring to
turn to piracy, Her Majesty holds these views erroneous and harmful,
since no just and paternal government should promote misfortunes among
its subjects in order to make itself more necessary, and thus keep
them dependent; and because, though there may be some who are content
with slavery in Sulu because it affords them a life of unrestraint,
it can not be ignored that their families and the Government suffer
a great injury from their situation, nor that morality would be
greatly outraged, if, for these reasons, countenance were given to
slavery, which should be attacked and exterminated at all costs. The
idea is advanced in the same communication, that in the countries
of the southern part of the Philippines, the system of protection,
carried to the point of establishing trading houses, will be almost
equivalent to possession and control, when once commercial interests
are held to be the chief interests, and there is set forth a plan to
diminish or even cut off the trade [280] with Mindanao, in order to
confine the commerce to our channels. Her Majesty, on being informed
of this policy of a protectorate, approves of the same, but desires
that it be carried out frankly and faithfully with the Sultan of Sulu,
in order that he be convinced, through experience, that the Spaniards
are his loyal friends, our authorities keeping it in mind that the
conquest of those countries is not to the interest of the nation, but
rather the acquisition of isolated military and mercantile stations,
which may control indirectly without the disadvantages of great expense
and of arousing the hatred of the natives. This alliance or friendship
with the Sultan should be such, that in whatever war he may be engaged
with his rebellious subjects, he shall be aided in good faith, unless
his adversary should be of such strength as to insure his triumph,
for then the useless defense of the vanquished would subject us
to the contempt of the conqueror and we should lose the benefits
already acquired. In such cases we should remain neutral, under some
plausible pretext of impracticableness or other honorable reason. In
other wars, waged by the Sultan with other princes, we should attempt
to mediate, with the purpose that, by settling new discords, we may
obtain advantages from the two or more belligerents, as rewards for
the services rendered them; but in the event of having to oppose some
one of them, it should be that one who offers us the least advantages,
and has the best chances of triumph, because with our ally victorious,
the latter may in the treaty of peace execute articles favorable to our
commerce,--trying always, above all things, so to act that the victor
shall not become too strong nor the vanquished brought too low. With
regard to the policy which it is best to adopt as a general rule in
regard to commerce, your Excellency should remember that the best
system consists in the greatest possible liberty for our merchandise,
and in securing, directly or indirectly, for our own merchandise,
or foreign goods carried by the national vessels, the enjoyment of
greater privileges than those of any other country, in order that
they may be preferred and produce greater profits on the markets.

In the same letter he submits the opinion that the lack of
communication of the countries to the south with the Philippines, is a
most favorable political measure for Spanish commerce, and recommends
that our relations with the Government of Sulu should be strengthened
in order to include the same under our dependence at some future
time, it being necessary to act with cunning in order to separate
it completely from the piratical warfare. Her Majesty commands me
to state to you concerning these matters, that the communication
of Sulu with the Philippines being purely commercial, should not
be restricted, but on the contrary, should be increased in every
way possible, encouragement should be given to the establishment of
traders and Spanish trading houses in Sulu, where our good conduct and
benevolence toward the natives may bring us profit. But it is always
to be borne in mind that the Government of Her Majesty does not desire
the subjection of other states to itself, but a sincere friendship
and a close and useful alliance, and that a just and discreet policy,
not crafty nor artful, will accomplish most in withdrawing the Sultan
from the interests of the leaders of the pirates.

Your Excellency will note in the draft of the communication from
your predecessor, to which I make answer, the proposal of various
schemes for establishing ourselves securely in Sulu. Such would be
the establishment of a trading house there, already agreed upon in
the treaty, and posting there a garrison, under the pretext that it
is for the safety and greater state of the person of the Sultan. Her
Majesty deems indispensable the establishment of the trading house,
but it should be done in such a manner as not to cause distrust,
and fortified and protected from any sudden attack, using in this the
greatest prudence, and remembering that a garrison there, though it
might be acceptable to the Sultan, might wound the self-love of the
people of the country, and so render odious both the Sultan and his
protectors. The most essential thing for the Spaniards, in order to
become firmly established, is to make themselves popular, to respect
the customs of the people, even with veneration, not offending any
one for any reason, treating all with courtesy and decorum; not
showing themselves domineering nor covetous, not insulting any one,
but being very respectful to women, the old and children, not scoffing
at anything in their public amusements, nor religious affairs, nor
in their meetings. It seems to her Majesty that through these means
would be secured a consistent friendship between both countries,
and that the most adequate plan for the support and defense of the
trading house would be to maintain in the safest harbor a permanent
maritime force, in which should be stored all arms and munitions,
and sufficient soldiers, in case it should be necessary to defend
the building, without arousing the suspicions that would be caused
by placing these preparations, concealed or openly, in the house
itself; and since for this purpose, for the defense of the country
against the pirates, and for maintaining the respect of the people
and Government of the protectorate, it is indispensable to keep a
well organized sea force, her Majesty had determined that you decide
the manner of organizing this maritime force, without losing sight
of the great economy which it is necessary to observe on account of
the embarrassed condition of the Peninsula, which needs now more than
ever before the assistance of her colonial provinces.

Finally, the predecessor of your Excellency further stated that
he was attempting to extend his efforts to the establishing of the
protectorate over the countries subject to the Sultan of Mindanao:
her Majesty approves this policy on condition that in its execution the
purposes and measures, which are mentioned above for Sulu, be adopted.

Her Majesty, by whose Royal order I communicate to your Excellency
the foregoing, trusts in your zeal to realize the importance of this
matter, and, regarding the principles of justice and right which
direct the resolutions of her Majesty, to direct all your efforts
to the accomplishment of the results desired; carefully reporting
your progress in the affair, for the information of her Majesty and
further action. God preserve your Excellency many years.


Madrid, June 23, 1837.

Mendizabal.--Rubricated.

The Governor Captain-General of the Philippines.


Ministry of the Navy, Commerce, and Colonial Administration

Most Excellent Sir: The predecessor of your Excellency, convinced of
the important advantages to be derived by the Philippines, in making
more intimate and more secure our few and doubtful relations with
the island of Sulu, determined immediately upon assuming command,
to negotiate with the Sultan of the said place, a treaty of peace
and commerce which he considered, in every respect, not only useful
but indispensable to the prosperity of the country. After having
announced this project in various of his communications, he reported
in December of last year, having accomplished the same, and furnished
in several communications, an exact and detailed account of the
history of his labors in the affair, the reasons which he had for
undertaking the same, the benefits which he expects as results, and
the measures whose adoption he deems necessary in order that these
results may be more certain, and at the same time profitable. There
were received from him seven letters, all marked with the letter "A,"
numbered from 14 to 23, and dated from the 15th to the 29th of the
said month; with so many points of analogy and similarity between
them, that they should be considered as one only. The first, number
14, is intended to furnish information and data relative to Sulu,
and the other Mohammedan islands of the south (without which it would
be impossible to know their importance) and to detail the relations
which we should have with them, considering them both in relation to
commerce and with respect to the war of enslavement. In the second, of
a confidential nature, he outlines the policy, which, in his opinion,
should be adopted in order to obtain all the advantages which our
position affords. In the third, number 16, he states the measures
which should be adopted for the benefit of the national commerce
in those countries. In the fourth, number 20, he transmits a copy
of the treaty of peace, protection and commerce concluded with the
Sultan of Sulu, and of the stipulations made for the determination
of the duties which our vessels should pay in Sulu, and the Sulus
in Manila and Zamboanga. In the fifth, number 21, he relates the
motives which have led him to direct these matters as he has done,
transmitting to her Majesty all the plans referring to it, through this
Ministry only. In the sixth, number 22, he gives account of some of
the advantages which have been derived from our expedition to Sulu,
and amongst others, a treaty of peace concluded between the pueblo
of Malusu and the Governor of Zamboanga. And finally, in the seventh,
number 23, he sets forth the necessity of retaining at that station,
the frigate-captain, Don José María Halcon, who performed the duty
of commissioner for the negotiation of the treaty.

I have informed her Majesty, the Queen Regent, of the contents of
all these communications, and in this knowledge she has seen fit
to approve, in a general manner, all the measures adopted by the
aforementioned predecessor of your Excellency, giving suitable orders,
that the proper Ministry provide the special approval which some of
them deserve, on account of their weight and importance, concerning
which your Excellency will soon be informed, and deigning to command
me to submit in a separate and particular communication the following
advice on the special subject of the letters referred to above.

Her Majesty, feeling assured that conquests in themselves, and later
their maintenance, absorb the profits which accrue from the countries
already acquired, prefers to any conquest advantageous trade and
commerce. Convinced, therefore, that the most profitable and lucrative
policy is to conquer or secure such places as on account of their
fortunate location may prove to be at the same time strong military and
mercantile posts and so both promote and protect commerce, she cannot
but approve the ideas your Excellency's predecessor expresses in his
communication numbered 14, and desires, that upon adopting the system
in accordance with those ideas, you confine yourself solely, in all
enterprises of conquest, to occupation of territory either abandoned
or uninhabited, or to that which, notwithstanding its being settled,
would cost little and would not give occasion for a costly war. In
order to increase our commercial advantages in Sulu, and to raise up
rivals to the Portuguese, it would be well to grant protection and
reduction in duties to the Chinese junks [281] under the specific
condition that they do not sail under the flag of any other nation
(without mentioning the Portuguese by name in order not to occasion
the resentment of this power) and to secure in Sulu for those who
adopt the Spanish flag, a reduction of duties although not as much
as that which should be granted to Spanish vessels. Thus it is the
will of her Majesty that you be directed, commanding, with the same
purpose in view, that your predecessor state to you explicitly, which
are the measures that he would have adopted, had he been authorized
to do so, in order to avoid the blow to our commerce threatened by
the Portuguese, depriving us with the double expedition from Macao and
Singapore to Sulu, of the advantage over all other nations which still
remained to us in this traffic; and that your Excellency obstruct,
by all the means in your power, the association of interests between
the commercial houses of Manila with those of Macao and Singapore,
if the same were intended to secure special privileges in the island
of Sulu to the products of the Philippines to the injury of the
national commerce.

With respect to the matter of the war against piracy, referred to also
in letter number 14, her Majesty approves all the purposes expressed
therein by the predecessor of your Excellency, and commands me to
direct your Excellency that, without ever recurring to war or the
interruption of traffic with Sulu as means of destroying or diminishing
piracy and traffic in slaves, you exert yourself to suppress the same
and remedy the evil which it inflicts on the Philippines, by the
various means at hand, to-wit; 1st, through negotiations with the
Sultan of Sulu; in which measures suitable for the accomplishment
of the purpose may be concerted; 2d, securing the increase, by the
Sultan, of import duties on slaves who are Spanish subjects, and the
lowering of duties on slaves of other countries; 3d, requesting of him
assistance in driving out the pirates from their haunts of Balangingi
and other places; 4th, watching the rendezvous of these pirates in
the Bisayas also, in order to destroy them. In this manner and with
hard lessons, with the energetic and continuous warfare spoken of by
the predecessor of your Excellency, the extermination of piracy will
be accomplished without the evils which would follow upon an unwise
and useless war against Sulu, and without the more serious result to
which the same would expose us, and which her Majesty desires your
Excellency to avoid at any cost, the result referred to being the
removal of the Sultan to some other point, which removal England and
Holland might turn to great advantage against our trade.

As to the measures proposed in letter number 16, for the benefit
of the national commerce, her Majesty will determine which is fit,
notifying your Excellency in due season. Meanwhile you should keep
in mind, that as long as the Sulus man their ships with slaves,
your Excellency should prohibit them from trading in Zamboanga and
all other places within the dominions of her Majesty, whenever the
ships which they use shall be manned in whole or in part with slaves
who are subjects of Spain.

Concerning the treaty of peace, protection and commerce, a copy of
which is inclosed in letter number 20, her Majesty has been pleased to
resolve, after careful examination, that it be forwarded with favorable
comment to the Ministry of State for the approval of the Cortes and
the ratification of her Majesty, all of which will be communicated
to your Excellency in due time, its policy being carried out and
its intent carefully observed in the meanwhile, for the purpose of
determining whether there is anything to amend or correct by means
of further negotiation, which would be considered as an appendix to
the treaty. In view of the explanations concerning the first article
of the aforementioned treaty furnished by the commissioner of the
negotiation, her Majesty commands me to repeat to your Excellency
the necessity for carrying out the policy which is prescribed to
your Excellency with regard to acquisition and conquest; in order to
claim those lands referred to in the explanations, if perchance such
claim should be advisable for the purpose of acquiring some point of
military or mercantile value: or in order to set up the claim of the
Kingdom of Spain to those countries, in order that by giving it up,
we may secure other things which may be of real importance to us, such
as reduction in duties, some exclusive privilege, or the possession
of some isolated point of great importance.

The predecessor of your Excellency by addressing to this Ministry all
communications bearing on this matter, has merited the approbation
of her Majesty, because he has avoided many unnecessary steps and
useless delay, and thus your Excellency will continue to do, in the
manner herein indicated.

And finally, her Majesty having noted with satisfaction the favorable
results produced already by the expedition to Sulu, and approving
the idea of not using the fifteen hundred dollars sent by the Bishop
of Nueva Segovia for the redemption of slaves, she commands me to
direct your Excellency to cultivate the friendship of all the chiefs
who, like the Orankaya of Malusu, abandon the pursuit of piracy,
and that suitable orders be issued by the Division of the Marine
of this Ministry, not only that the captain of frigate, Don José
María Halcon, who has so well discharged the duty of negotiating the
treaty, be assigned to that station, but that he also be duly rewarded
for his services as such commissioner; her Majesty not failing to
express the gratitude with which she declares her appreciation to the
predecessor of your Excellency, the aforementioned Don Pedro Antonio
Salazar. All of which is communicated to your Excellency, by Royal
order, for your due information and guidance, instructing you with
regard to the confidential letter, that you carry out the directions
forwarded you separately under this date. God preserve your Excellency.


Madrid, June 23, 1837.

Mendizabal.--Rubricated.

The Governor Captain-General of the Philippines.


APPENDIX XIV

CAMBA'S REPORT ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING THE TREATY OF 1836 AND
ITS BASES, NOVEMBER 16, 1837 [282]


Superior Government of the Philippines

Excellent Sir: In compliance with the provision of the Royal order of
the 24th of April last, requesting, for the information of her Majesty
the record of the correspondence exchanged in regard to the treaty
of commerce made by my predecessor with the Sultan of Sulu, and the
bases of said treaty, I forward the same to your Excellency, with a
few personal observations suggested by a reading of the said papers.

On the 31st of January, 1835, the Tribunal of Commerce forwarded to the
Captain-General, approved by it, a report presented by several business
men who traded with Sulu, setting forth the deceitful methods of the
Datus, or principal people of the island, in their agreements and
contracts, and requesting, in order to restrain and intimidate them,
that the naval division of Zamboanga, or part of it, be stationed in
the port of Jolo during the time the national merchant vessels remain
there for the purpose of making their sales and purchases. A decree was
issued on the 9th of March of the same year, concurring in the opinion
of the Assessor, and declaring that the request could not be granted at
that time, but that it would be taken into consideration as soon as the
circumstances allowed. This is a brief of the document marked Number 1.

On the 9th of February, 1836, José Dugiols, who had sold goods on
credit to the amount of 8000 pesos to the Jolo people, and despaired
of getting paid, presented a new petition, similar to that which
had been sent 11 months before. The Chamber of Commerce approved it,
and requested that a fleet of launches be stationed at Jolo during
the business season, there to gather information which would allow
the Government to take proper action in the matter; it also insisted
that the commander of the fleet be a capable person, who, without
compromising the flag, would know how to conciliate the purpose of
the naval demonstration with the spirit of peace and concord which he
ought to maintain between the crews of our ships and the people of
Jolo. This suggestion, which had already been made in the petition
presented the year before, was favorably endorsed one after the
other by all who intervened in the papers in the case and resulted
in the final resolution of May 31st, which contains 14 articles. The
first provides that it shall be one of the duties of the commander
of the naval division of Zamboanga to protect the Spanish ships while
they are at Jolo, and instructions are given him to that effect. The
second appoints captain of frigate José María Halcon to take charge,
temporarily, of the command of the Division of Zamboanga, and establish
relations of friendship and commerce with the Sulu people. The third
directs him to inform the Sulu Sultan of his visit in the way he may
deem most likely to convince him of the peaceful intentions of this
Government. The fourth directs him to make himself recognized by the
officers and men of our ships, as the commanding authority who shall
maintain them in peace and good order. The fifth charges him not to
allow his men to land, so as to avoid disorder. The sixth directs him
to take action in regard to any excess, as provided by the Code. The
seventh, to hold in check the crews of our ships, so as to give the
Sulus neither reason nor pretence for showing their bad faith. The
ninth forbids the commander of the division and all those under his
orders to enter into any business speculation whatsoever. The tenth
directs the commander to be ever careful to keep all his men within
the bounds of duty. By the eleventh he is directed to see that all
contracts are religiously fulfilled, and, if necessary, to complain
energetically to the Sultan, and by the twelfth to see that our people
fulfil their own. Articles thirteen and fourteen direct the commander
to obtain information about the political and civil conditions of
Sulu and its topographic situation.

After acquainting himself with the foregoing, Captain José María
Halcon inquired what would be the minimum importation duty in Manila
for articles proceeding from Sulu, and asked for instructions in
regard to the importation of arms and ammunition into Sulu by our
ships. In answer to the first question, the Board of Tariffs fixed
at 2 per cent the duty on all articles imported from Sulu to Manila
in its own vessels, [283] except wax and cacao, which would have to
pay 14 per cent under a foreign flag and half that amount under the
national flag; in regard to the second the importation of arms and
ammunition into Sulu by our ships was prohibited.

A letter to the Sultan of Sulu was furthermore given the commander,
accrediting him and explaining his mission, the petition presented by
Dugiols and endorsed by the Chamber of Commerce, requesting that our
business relations with Sulu be granted a protection which experience
made each day more necessary, being thus complied with.

On April 15, 1836, Halcon forwarded the capitulations of peace and
the commercial agreements made by him in the name of this Government
with the Sultan of Sulu. The first consists of 6 articles, by which
the Spanish Government grants the Sultan its protection, which is
accepted by the latter, with a mutual assurance of coöperation between
them against any nation not European. Spanish boats are to be admitted
freely in Sulu, and Sulu boats in Zamboanga and Manila. It is agreed
that a Spanish factory shall be established in Jolo, so as to avoid
damages and delays to our commerce, the same right being given the
Sulus in Manila. Certain rules are established in order to distinguish
friendly from hostile boats. The Sultan is pledged to prevent piracy on
the part of those who recognize his authority; and it is furthermore
agreed that in case of any doubt as to the meaning of any article,
the literal Spanish text shall be followed. In accordance with the
opinion of the Government assessor, these capitulations were approved
by decree of January 20 of this year. The commercial agreements
contain 9 articles. The first establishes a duty of 2 1/2 per cent on
all products brought by the Sulus. The second excepts wax and cacao,
as recommended by the Board of Tariffs. The third provides a duty of
1 per cent for the importation in Zamboanga of products brought by
the Sulus. The fourth provides that the payment of the duties shall
be made in cash in silver. The fifth establishes the dues to be
paid by our boats at Sulu. The sixth fixes the value, in products,
of those dues. The seventh, in its first part, declares, that all
Sulu boats trading without a license shall be treated as smugglers,
under the law of the Kingdom; in its second part it also requires
our boats to show a bill of lading in accordance with the cargo,
on pain of a fine of P500, two thirds to go to the Sultan and one
third to our exchequer. The eighth provides that if the duties are
reduced in Manila and Zamboanga on the articles coming from Sulu, the
same shall be done in Sulu, and that if the Sultan reduces the dues on
foreign ships, he shall do the same for ours. The ninth provides that
in case of doubt the literal Spanish text shall be followed. After
hearing the opinions of the Boards of Commerce and Tariffs, and in
accordance with that of the assessor, the foregoing was approved by
decree of the 20th of January of this year, with a small reduction
of 1/2 per cent on the duties to be paid by the Sulus in Manila, and
an explanation of the proceeding to be followed for the appraisement
of their cargoes in Zamboanga and in Manila.

Shortly before this ratification by the Government, it was decreed on
the 13th of January, at the request of Commissioner Halcon, that in
order to avoid trouble between this Government and that of Sulu, the
captains and supercargoes of the Spanish ships should give no credit
to the Sulus, except with the authorization of the Sultan, under the
penalty of being barred from claiming his protection or that of the
Spanish Government for the collection of such credits; and that all
settlements of the pay of the crews of our ships should be so made
as to avoid the abuse of paying them in kind, instead of currency.

Such is the information which I have found, and am forwarding to your
Excellency in regard to the treaties mentioned. The leading idea in
said treaties is one of distrust towards the people of Sulu, on account
of their treacherous, cruel and perfidious nature. As this is the
only idea which prevails in all our relations with the island, as well
as in the Royal order of August 28, 1751, and the documents attached
thereto, without referring to older time, I can not be persuaded that
the policy of peace and alliance adopted with the Sultan of Sulu can
give our shipping and commerce any substantial and permanent advantage.

Several Royal decrees find fault with such treaties and even order them
to be revoked in case they have been made; and to justify departure
from these sovereign instructions, given with a true knowledge of the
facts, and in accordance with the opinion of the illustrious members of
the Cabinet, there must now be some powerful political reason which I
can not discover. If we take into consideration the very weak authority
of the Sultan over his subjects, and the scarcity of his means in the
midst of datus or chieftains who, with their families and slaves,
constitute distinct communities which are haughty, ambitious and
dangerous to him, we find that there is in Sulu no moral force on
which to rely for the execution of a treaty, even should there be
the best faith and good will on the part of the Sultan.

Furthermore, Sulu and the small adjacent islands produce nothing; even
the rice and fish which the people use for their food come from our
neighboring possessions: what business reasons are there therefore,
capable of calling our attention, or whose profits would pay the
expenses of a fleet placed in observation there? All the produce of
the islands consists of bêche-de-mer and shell which are gathered by
the slaves; [284] the clothing and foodstuffs are furnished them,
on credit, by our own ships; gold, wax and edible nests come from
Mindanao. Hence commerce is confined to a season outside of which
our ships never go near Sulu.

There is therefore little advantage to be derived by our commerce
from these treaties, and this is confirmed by the communication just
received by me from the commander of the Zamboanga division, which I
enclose as number 6. It betrays complete disappointment, and shows the
wisdom of the instructions given in the above mentioned Royal decrees.

The policy which we ought to follow with the Sulus is one of continual
and perspicacious caution, with well conditioned, well situated and
well commanded naval forces, ready to obtain at once satisfaction
for any offense to our flag; and I believe that this could be done
without much trouble, by using steamships, as the Dutch have done
in their settlements in the Moluccas, where they suffered from the
piracy of the Moros much as we do in the Philippines.

The foregoing information covers, I believe, all the points mentioned
in the Royal order of April 24th, last, and which are the object
of the present communication and of the documents which I enclose
therewith. May God keep your Excellency many years.


Manila, November 16, 1837.

Andrés G. Camba.

His Excellency the Secretary of State and of the Department of the
Navy, Commerce, and Colonies.


APPENDIX XV

CAMBA'S REPORT TO THE COLONIAL OFFICE DISCUSSING THE DIFFICULTIES OF
COMMERCE WITH SULU AND THE ADVISABILITY OF MAKING ZAMBOANGA A FREE
PORT, FEBRUARY 23, 1838 [285]


Superior Government of the Philippines.

Excellent Sir: I acknowledge to your Excellency the receipt of two
Royal orders dated the 23d of June of last year, which, with reference
to the treaties made with the Sultan of Sulu, have been transmitted
by your ministry; one replying to the seven communications marked "A"
which my predecessor made in connection with the same subject; the
other confidential, and indicating the policy and measures that should
be carried out with the said Sultan of Sulu and the Sultan of Mindanao.

In communication numbered 5, and dated November 16th last, in
compliance with one of the provisions of Royal order of last April,
I made a minute report accompanied by documentary evidence, of the
antecedents which I encountered relative to Sulu affairs, and at the
same time, could not but intimate in this connection how little I
expected as a result of our treaties, because experience had already
caused me to be suspicious, and also because the various Royal orders
toward the close of the past century confirmed me in this idea;
[286] and indeed the losses which all our commercial expeditions
experienced during the first year of these treaties, the vexations
they suffered and the risks to which the crews as well as the vessels
and their cargoes were exposed during their stay in Jolo, have fully
borne out this view.

Many are the measures and documents which we have here, in which
this same fact is laid down; many are the Royal decrees in which,
in recognition of this fact, the Governors of the Philippines have
even been authorized, by every means in their power and without
counting cost or difficulty, to punish severely the intrepidity of
those infidel barbarians.

In order to arouse and interest the Royal conscience on that point,
it was requisite that there should be repeatedly presented through
various channels and at distinct times substantiated accounts,
non-conflicting and extremely painful, of the various piracies,
cruelties, and vexations, with which those barbarians have kept the
Philippine Islands in the south in a state of fear and depression;
and needful also was it that there should have been employed, in
vain, on account of the religion and the policy of our ancestors,
those gentle measures of peace and union which no civilized people
could resist; but which are ineffectual with barbarous nations who
know no other right than that of force.

From the 14th of April, 1646, when we abandoned possession of Sulu,
which our arms had so gloriously conquered, making a treaty of peace
whereby the Sulus bound themselves to pay us annually, as tribute,
three boatloads of unhulled rice, until the day the Government
again entered into a treaty with them, neither have the Filipinos
succeeded in freeing themselves from their harassments, nor has
the Government reaped any fruit other than continual menace. The
English have had the same experience with the perfidy and bad faith
of those islanders. After having formed, in the island of Balambangan
by a concession made by the Sulus, a settlement destined to be the
emporium for the products of the East in connection with their China
trade, for which this island offers two good ports, they were two
years afterwards surprised by the Sulus themselves, who, knowing the
English had despatched their vessels, took advantage of their absence
by taking possession of the island and the fort constructed therein,
also a great deal of booty, which cost the English East India Company
a loss of more than three hundred thousand dollars. In narrating
this event, Mr. J. H. Moor, who published last year a brief review
of interesting events concerning the islands and lands bordering on
the China Sea, agrees with the views I have expressed, namely, that
these acts of treachery and cruelty on the part of the Sulus are the
offspring of their innate love of robbery and their natural perfidy.

All these facts then will convince your Excellency that the
expectations based by my acting predecessor upon the latest treaties
referred to are too sanguine. They would produce no illusions on
my part, in view of the experience of the past, neither does it
seem to me that their results, looked at with calmness and in the
light of the most exact data, could be of any great advantage to
our commerce. Allowing that the treaties should be religiously
complied with, never would they be of any value, in themselves,
to improve the brutal condition of those islanders. This condition
will always constitute, not only for the Spaniards but also for all
civilized nations, a great drawback to mercantile relations, which,
although founded on principles of utility and mutual advantage,
cannot continue nor be developed except under the most favorable
guaranties. How would our merchants, or the foreign merchants of Sulu
obtain them, where there is neither good faith nor justice, and where
cunning fraud makes even the Chinese dangerous traders? Commerce
is the movement and circulation of wealth. The latter results from
production, and production from the full and unrestricted utilization
of property. Moreover, when property is insecure, when the laws do
not protect it, when the agents of the Government are the first to
disregard it, the mercantile spirit is the first to become alarmed
and, when defrauded, to flee as far as possible from the place where
it does not find that safe haven it requires to expand and to pursue
with skill and perseverance the objects of its calling. Thus it is
that during the period elapsed since the year cited, 1646, up to the
present time, no Spanish merchant has himself had direct dealings with
the inhabitants of Sulu, the Chinese alone being engaged in this trade,
they being the only charterers of our vessels, so that we do not obtain
from said commerce more than interest on the capital invested, subject
to great exposure and risk, which has made and always will make,
this commerce uncertain and of little value. While lack of security
still sets a limit to the extent of our speculation in commerce with
Sulu, lack of advantageous reciprocity adds another factor no less
appreciable. At the time the Spaniards came to the Philippines, Sulu
seems to have been rich in her own natural and industrial products,
and richer still through the large commerce which their exchange
enabled her to carry on with the Chinese vessels which in large numbers
frequented her coasts. Situated almost midway between the Philippines
and the Moluccas, close to two rich islands so fertile and densely
populated as Mindanao and Borneo, it seemed destined by nature to be
the emporium of the commerce of the south. Converted to Islamism by
the Arab Sayed Ali, [287] who landed there from Mecca, how much ought
this principle of civilization in the midst of barbarous nations
have tended to their advancement! But times have changed greatly
since then, and brought their always accompanying vicissitudes. As
Spanish dominion was extended in the Philippines and the Portuguese
penetrated into the Moluccas, they began attracting to their capitals
the wealth and traffic that was accumulating in Sulu, and here begins
a new era. War and desolation, which for a period of eighty years we
inflicted on them, followed, and put in our power this island and its
dependencies, and though independence was later restored, it could not
divert this rich commerce from the trend it had taken. Meanwhile, their
wars and internal dissensions resulted in corrupting their customs,
and there only remained for them the habit of piracy, which ever since
our appearance, they had embraced for the purpose of harassing us.

Since then Sulu has been converted into a refuge for pirates allured
by its favorable position, and these barbarians, being more solicitous
of carrying on their devastations than of cultivating their land,
have not ceased to be the greatest scourge of our inhabitants of
the south. This explains the impossibility of obtaining from them by
entreaty anything in the way of peace and tranquillity, which to them
as well as to us would be so beneficial.

For this reason, Sulu, which contains a population of pirates and
slaves, is nothing more than a shipping point where certain products
are collected from the other islands of the south. It is surrounded by
islands and islets, which form the archipelago bearing its name, and
has a length from east to west of about ten leagues, a width of four
and a half, and a circumference of thirty-two. The total population
credited to the Archipelago is from 149,000 to 150,000 souls, 6,800
of which inhabit Jolo, and in this number are included 800 Chinese.

The houses, or rather huts, of the principal place, are estimated to
number 3,500, and that of the petty king, called Sultan, cannot be
distinguished from the rest except for its greater size; all of bamboo
and nipa, weak and poor as their owners, but with cannons of various
calibers which mark the residences of the datus, descendants of the
petty kings, and who themselves constitute the oligarchy of their
Government. I have already stated that the Sultan can do nothing, all
matters being decreed by the convention, or Rum Bichara of the datus,
where the owner of the greatest number of slaves always decides the
questions. [288] Wealth, influence and power, are measured among
them solely by the number of slaves, and this is why they cannot
but be pirates, in order to acquire this wealth, nor can they offer
any guaranty, if it must be accompanied by the renunciation of this
pursuit.

By this picture, which is corroborated by the Englishman Moor in
his description of Sulu, it will be seen that we can expect nothing
from our present relations with Sulu in the way of securing the
tranquillity and prosperity of our islands of the south. Neither
is a system of continual hostility the best way of procuring these
precious gifts, but the promotion and throwing open of avenues of
commerce, directing it to one of our ports, which, in view of its
position, ought to be Zamboanga; and in this I coincide with the
views of my predecessor. Zamboanga, with a different organization,
the concession of a free port for all the products from the south and
those brought in champanes from China, and the free admission of the
exiles who seek refuge there as well as the Chinese traders, aiding
the former in establishing themselves, and exempting the latter from
all taxes for the first ten years, would be, in all probability, the
most suitable point to which to divert from Sulu the little transit
business which remains, to guard, from a shorter distance, against the
piracy of its inhabitants, and to bring them in the course of time,
perhaps, to a more humane mode of living.

But all this requires first the planning of a suitable and adequate
system which, bringing nearer to the islands of the south the
protection and vigilance of the Government of the capital by means
of a subordinate Government embracing its chief characteristics,
would relieve those precious islands from the calamities which up
to the present time they have suffered by reason of their remoteness
and possibly also because of our neglect.

This plan, which I desire to combine with a forward movement in the
great and rich island of Mindanao, a large part of whose coast is
surrounded by the districts of the corregidors [289] of Karaga and
Misamis, will bring about without doubt a new and happy era for the
Filipinos of the south, and place, without the sacrifice of people
or money, a large number of faithful subjects under the illustrious
Government of her Majesty, furnishing the same also with a greater
abundance of resources.

To this end I shall hold in view and faithfully observe the policy
which her Majesty outlines in her confidential Royal order, to which
I reply; its application will be the constant object of everything I
decree and execute. And very happy shall I be thus to make suitable
return for the many proofs of co-operation and esteem, which, for the
past thirteen years I have received from the Filipinos; infinitely
more so, because working at the same time for the better service of
her Majesty in accordance with her Royal plans in which these people
have always found their greatest and surest well-being.

Your Excellency being convinced, then, that these are the sentiments
which impel me and the plans I contemplate for the fulfillment of the
important duties her Majesty has deigned to confer upon me, can from
this reply assure her that as far as I am concerned, nothing shall be
left undone to carry out to the letter the policy she has been pleased
to outline to me, and to merit thereby her august confidence, which
I so earnestly desire. May God preserve your Excellency many years.


Manila, February 23, 1838.

Andrés G. Camba.

The most excellent, the Secretary, Office of Colonial Administration.


APPENDIX XVI

COMMUNICATION FROM THE GOVERNOR OF ZAMBOANGA TO THE SUPREME GOVERNMENT
OF THE PHILIPPINES RELATIVE TO THE TREATY OF SIR JAMES BROOKE WITH
THE SULTAN OF SULU, TOGETHER WITH OTHER COMMUNICATIONS RELATING TO
THE TREATY, 1849 [290]


Office of the Secretary of the Governor and Captain-General of the
Philippines.


Jolo, May 28th, 1849.

Sr. Don Cayetano Figueroa, Zamboanga.


Dear Sir:--I think proper to inform you that yesterday, at three
o'clock in the afternoon, the English war steamer "Nemesis" cast
anchor at this port, coming from Singapore. She brought on board Sir
James Brooke, commissioned to make a treaty of peace and friendship
between Great Britain and the Sultan. This treaty was presented to
the Sultan to-day in the presence of the Datus and a majority of
the people, and after being read in a loud voice it was immediately
approved and ratified. I do not think it necessary to inform you
as to the tenor of said treaty, as Mr. Brooke has told me that he
would go from here to your city for the purpose of communicating to
you everything regarding this matter so that you will be thoroughly
acquainted with all the details. I understand that they have hastened
this matter in view of the recent advices concerning the destruction
of Bali by the Dutch troops and their declared intention of taking
possession of the entire coast of North Borneo, Sulu, and all its
dependencies. In letters received from my partner at Singapore he
tells me that it is certain they are coming, and with a large force,
but it may be not for a month or two. The people here, in view of this
news, have carried everything they have to the interior, and are ready,
whenever the Dutch arrive, to leave the town. We shall see where these
things will stop. Possibly we shall have another case like that of
the French before you leave Zamboanga. Whatever you may decide to
do when you receive this communication, you know that my services
are always at your disposal, and in the event of your determining to
come, there is a house here at your disposition; and I promise you a
friendly reception on the part of the residents. It is my opinion they
are in such a fright that they do not know what to do and business,
of course, is entirely neglected. My brother-in-law, who is the bearer
of this, will inform you in regard to what is going on. He goes to
your town to purchase rice for our house, to provide against a siege;
for rice is dear and scarce here. I remain, your obedient servant,
who kisses your hand.--Guillermo Windham.


Batavia, March 20, 1849.--It appears that the expedition against Jolo
is a matter fully determined upon. It is said that two steamers, two
frigates, and a corvette, operating at the present time against Bali,
are in readiness to set sail the first part of July. I expect that the
publishers of the Singapore paper will publish an article entitled,
"Labuan, Sarawak, the northeast coast of Borneo and the Sultan of
Sulu," by Baron Hoeveel, published in Holland in the first number
of the "Journal for Netherlands India," during the month of January
last, in which he informs his compatriots that if the Government of
Java had followed the counsels of Resident Gronovius of Sambas in
1831 or those of Resident Bloem of Sambas in 1838, they would long
ago have had treaties with the Sultan of Bruney which would have
closed Sarawak and the northern coast to all flags except the Dutch,
and that the questions with the English Government would not have
arisen, but that now it is not worth while to discuss it with the
court of St. James. England is in possession, and she will stay in
possession if she considers it to her advantage. He tells them to
be on their guard, because if they do not have a care the English
will make another move; and he indicates the point which calls for
immediate and indispensable protection, namely, the northeast coast
of Borneo: that is to say, from Sampan Manjee Point to the Cape of
Kamongan (the Straits of Makassar), which he says are tributary to the
Sultan of Sulu. He gives information concerning the different stations
for the principal departments: Malsedu (or Kinabalu), Manjedore and
Tiroen, designating the bay of Sandakan for the first establishment,
as soon as they have taken possession of this side. He enumerates
the products of this part of the world: the pearls, the diamonds,
the iron and gold mines, the birds'-nests, the trepang, etc.; so that
he has strongly influenced the minds of the Dutch. And he concludes
by stating that in the next article of his paper he will discuss the
Sultan's possession in relation to the government of the Dutch Indies,
offering some suggestions as to how his countrymen may avail themselves
of the advantages of this rich territory. It is a truly interesting
article and appears to me no less curious than reasonable. The editor
of the Journal of the Eastern Archipelago will do a good service to
his countrymen by making a translation of it, but it must be done
very soon. I am too busy to write a paper of such length, otherwise
it would have given me pleasure to send you one for your own use. I
reiterate the necessity for despatch, for I really believe that
the Dutch government will work for its own interests in accordance
with the plans which the Baron has marked out. The English will not
relish the idea of their oriental Government sleeping and permitting
the Sultan to make, under coercion, a treaty such as must be made in
order to forward the plans of Van Hoeveel. The vessels of the King
of the Low Countries, the "Prince of Orange," "Sambi," and "Argo,"
with five others, set sail on the 15th of this month, transporting
1,800 men in the direction of Bali. Afterwards they are to carry to
Surabaya, on the 25th proximo, 5,000 men more, besides from 2,500 to
3,000 coolies, 12 cannon, 2 mortars, etc., etc. Receive, etc.

These are notices taken from a letter to hand, from a trustworthy
person in Singapore.--Figueroa.


Military and Civil Government, Plaza de Zamboanga.--No. 101.--
Department  of Government.--Excellent Sir:--Notwithstanding the fact
that the lieutenant governor of this province informs me that he
transcribed and forwarded to your Excellency, while he was in charge
of the civil government during my absence in Malusu, the letter which
Mr. William Windham, a merchant of Jolo, sent me under date of May
28th, it seems to me well to send the original to your Excellency,
which I now do, retaining a copy of it for the purpose of reference
at any time. As your Excellency may note if he will compare its
contents with the text of the treaty of the 29th of the same month
of May, made with the Sultan of Sulu by the English Consul-General
to Borneo, Sir James Brooke, there is, between the terms of the former
and the spirit of Article 7 of the latter, a notable lack of agreement;
wherefore it has not seemed to me well to place entire confidence in
the offer of Windham, who may be suspected of partiality, and I have
concluded, therefore, to move in such a delicate matter with all
possible tact and foresight and in accordance with developments, which
may become extremely complicated. Considering the great interest
which the agents of the English Government show in these questions
concerning Sulu and the part of Borneo subject to the Sultan, I
immediately suspected that the announcement of the imminent arrival
of a considerable Dutch force in the archipelago was only a strategem
to obtain, through surprise and fear, the realization of the agreement
or treaty referred to; but it having been possible for me to secure
fresh data through a different channel, confirming those which Windham
furnished me,--which latter I obtained through Mr. Brooke and the
captain of the "Nemesis," and herewith transmit to your Excellency,--
I am of the opinion now that the expedition of the Dutch to Jolo is an
enterprise fully determined upon, although it may very well be delayed
or postponed by fortuitous circumstances difficult to foresee. In the
event of the appearance of the Dutch expedition, I shall never believe
that it is with the object of confining its field of action to
punishing the place of residence of the Sultan in a more thorough
manner than was done in the attempt made in April of last year; but
that they intend to conquer and occupy the Island and its dependencies.
If this should be so, I am equally of the opinion that the Government
of your Excellency, notwithstanding its conspicuous firmness and
well-known energy, will not succeed in getting them to recede from
their purpose, as everything goes to show they have determined to
carry it out in the face--most assuredly--of our known and declared
rights and claims to the rule of that land. I venture, therefore, to
believe that the only way to prevent the serious detriment which would
result to this colony, under the wise and worthy government of your
Excellency, from the occupation of Sulu, avoiding at the same time a
conflict between the Spanish and Dutch Governments, respectively, would
be, by means of persuasion and by taking advantage of the state of
extreme alarm now existing in Sulu, to anticipate them by a recognition
of the sovereignty of Spain, floating our national flag under
guaranties which would make impossible (without manifest violence) this
proposed unprecedented aggression. I am convinced that besides flying
the national flag and having the sovereignty of Spain recognized in a
formal manner, the principal guaranty must be--and I shall require it
unconditionally--that they shall agree to let us garrison with Spanish
troops the principal fort of Sulu, the residence of the Sultan. To this
end I have decided to embark in the pilot boat "Pasig" and make my way
to Jolo without delay, where, if I do not obtain the results which I
have here set forth, it will certainly not be through lack of zeal and
activity, but through encountering obstacles beyond my control or
influence, and owing to difficulties incident to the temperament of
those people and the ancient prejudices which, owing to a series of
events stretching through centuries, they feel towards us, as is only
too well known to your Excellency. To aid me in these operations and
to meet possible contingencies--since there will be needed there, in
case of success, an expert and trustworthy officer--and to carry out
reconnaissances and make plans which cannot fail to be always of the
greatest usefulness to the government at Manila, I shall invite the
chief of engineers of this place, Don Emilio Bernaldez, to accompany
me, if the exigencies of the service do not demand his presence here
and at Pasanhan. All of which I have the honor to lay before your
Excellency in the hope that it may merit your entire approval. May God
preserve your Excellency many years.


Zamboanga, June 8, 1849.

Cayetano Figueroa.

His high Excellency the Governor and Captain-General of these
Philippine Islands.


Office of the Secretary of the Governor and Captain-General of the
Philippines.

Zamboanga, June 5th, 1849.--Mr. Consul-General:--I have the honor
to inform you that from notices received from Jolo, it has come to
my knowledge that during your stay there with the steamer "Nemesis"
you negotiated a commercial treaty with the Sultan Mohammed Pulalun;
and as I am entirely ignorant of its essential clauses, and as my
Government has for a long time past, and especially of late, been
in possession or enjoyment through solemn treaties, the first made
with the Malay chiefs, masters of the coasts of Sulu, of the right
that our commercial flag be at least as privileged as any other; and
in view of the indisputable rights which Spain has to the territory
in question, rights not merely of prescription; I have the honor to
request, in view of the close friendship which unites our respective
Governments and which I honor myself in maintaining, that you have
the kindness to give me, officially, knowledge of the said treaty and
a copy thereof in order that I may forward it to the most excellent,
the Governor-General of these Philippine Islands, without prejudice
to my making before you, if the spirit of any of these articles
so requires, the remonstrances that may be necessary to uphold the
rights of Spain.--Receive, Mr. Consul-General, the assurance of my
consideration, etc.

C. de Figueroa.


To Sir James Brooke, Consul-General of her Britannic Majesty in Borneo
and Governor of Labuan.


H. M. S. "Nemesis," June 3rd, 1849.--Sir:--I have the honor to reply
to your communication of this date; and as the quickest way to furnish
your Excellency with the information desired, I enclose herewith a copy
of the agreement recently made with the Government of Sulu. It would be
unprofitable to discuss at this time the rights of Spain to which you
make allusion, and the interests of Great Britain, which are involved,
but as the best means of preserving the cordial relations which should
always exist between the public servants of our respective governments,
I propose to forward our present correspondence to the Secretary of
Foreign Affairs of her Britannic Majesty. Nevertheless, permit me to
say that my opinion is that the interests of Spain and of Great Britain
in these seas should be considered entirely harmonious and equally
opposed to any system of oppression or of monopoly.--I have the honor
to be, with the greatest consideration, Sir, Your obedient servant.


Brooke, Commissioner and Consul-General.


To His Excellency C. de Figueroa, Governor of Zamboanga.


Her Majesty, the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, desirous of encouraging commerce between her subjects and
those of the independent princes in the Eastern seas, and of putting
an end to the piracy which has up to this time hindered said commerce:
and his Highness the Sultan Mohammed Pulalun who occupies the throne
and governs the territories of Sulu, animated by like sentiments
and desirous of co-operating in the measures which may be necessary
for the achievement of the objects mentioned; have resolved to place
on record their determination on these points by an agreement which
contains the following articles: Article 1. From now on there shall
be peace, friendship, and good understanding between her Majesty
the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland and his Highness Mohammed
Pulalun, Sultan of Sulu, and between their respective heirs and
successors, and between their subjects. Article 2. The subjects of
her Britannic Majesty shall have complete liberty to enter, reside,
carry on business, and pass with their merchandise through all parts
of the dominions of his Highness the Sultan of Sulu, and they shall
enjoy in them all the privileges and advantages with respect to
commerce or in connection with any other matter whatever which are
at this time enjoyed by, or which in the future may be granted to,
the subjects or citizens of the most favored nation; and the subjects
of his Highness the Sultan of Sulu shall likewise be free to enter,
reside, carry on business, and pass with their merchandise to all parts
of the dominions of her Britannic Majesty, in Europe as well as in
Asia, as freely as the subjects of the most favored nation, and they
shall enjoy in said dominions all the privileges and advantages with
respect to commerce and in connection with other matters which are now
enjoyed by, or which in the future may be granted to, the subjects or
citizens of the most favored nation. Article 3. British subjects shall
be permitted to buy, lease, or acquire in any lawful way whatever all
kinds of property within the dominions of His Highness the Sultan of
Sulu; and his Highness extends, as far as lies within his power, to
every British subject who establishes himself in his dominions, the
enjoyment of entire and complete protection and security to person
and to property--as well any property which in the future may be
acquired, as that which has already been acquired prior to the date
of this agreement. Article 4. His Highness the Sultan of Sulu offers
to allow the war vessels of her Britannic Majesty and those of the
India Company to enter freely the ports, rivers, and inlets situated
within his dominions and to permit said vessels to supply themselves,
at reasonable prices, with the goods and provisions which they may
need from time to time. Article 5. If any English vessel should
be lost on the coasts of the dominions of his Highness the Sultan
of Sulu the latter promises to lend every aid in his power for the
recovery and delivery to the owners of everything than can be saved
from said vessels; and his Highness also promises to give entire
protection to the officers and crew and to every person who may be
aboard the shipwrecked vessel, as well as to their property. Article
6. Therefore, her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, and the Sultan of Sulu, bind themselves to adopt
such measures as lie within their power to suppress piracy within
the seas, islands, and rivers under their respective jurisdiction
or influence, and his Highness the Sultan of Sulu binds himself not
to harbor or protect any person or vessel engaged in enterprises of
a piratical nature. Article 7. His Highness the Sultan of Sulu, for
the purpose of avoiding in the future any occasion for disagreement,
promises to make no cession of territory within his dominions to any
other nation, nor to subjects or citizens thereof, nor to acknowledge
vassalage or feudality to any other power without the consent of her
Britannic Majesty. Article 8. This treaty must be ratified, and the
ratifications will therefore be exchanged in Jolo within two years
from date. Home Copy.--Brooke.--Approved, etc.--Signed and sealed
May 29, 1849.


Zamboanga, June 5, 1849.--Mr. Consul-General:--I have received the
letter which you have done me the honor to send under date of the day
before yesterday in reply to mine, and I acknowledge receipt of copy of
the treaty which you negotiated with his Highness the Sultan of Sulu
on the 29th May last. I have no remarks to make, Mr. Consul-General,
with respect to the first six articles of the treaty, for the
clauses they contain are not of such an urgent character that my
Government cannot postpone their discussion if it so deems advisable;
but I might perhaps create in the future serious embarrassment to our
respective Governments should I allow Article 7 to pass unnoticed. It
establishes two principles of the most vital importance: (1st) His
Highness the Sultan binds himself to recognize the sovereignty of no
power without previously notifying her Britannic Majesty; and (2nd)
to make, likewise, no cession of the least portion of the territory
of his dominions to any State, person or corporation. With relation
to the first point, and waiving for the moment the question whether,
because the Sultan is in possession, with slight exceptions, of the
coast of Sulu, this island must be regarded as his exclusive domain,
it is my duty, Mr. Consul-General, to inform you that for a long time
past the said Sultan of Sulu has admitted and acknowledged himself
to be under the protection of her Catholic Majesty, recognizing the
sovereignty of Spain in a public way and in official documents which
his Excellency the Governor-General of these Philippine Islands will
be able to produce at the proper time and place. As regards the second
point: I find no objection to the pledge of his Highness having all the
force of free right with respect to those parts of his dominions lying
outside of the island of Sulu, namely, the north and northeast part of
Borneo, now under the rule of the Sultan; but under no circumstances
with respect to the said island of Sulu and its neighboring islands;
for not only can Spain not recognize in any power the right to
intervene in the matter of ceding or not ceding the island of Sulu
and its surrounding islands, as it is claimed can be done according
to the terms of Article 7 of the Treaty; but Spain does not recognize
this right even in the Sultan and Datus of Sulu, because, as I have
had the honor to inform you, Mr. Consul-General, these territories
belong to Spain, by a right not prescribed, by a right in no way
established by the conquest of this archipelago, but positively
through the willing submission of the real natives, the Gimbahans,
who do now, and who at the end of the 17th century did, constitute
the most numerous portion of its population, whose oppressors were
then and are now the Sultan and Datus, Malay Mussulmans. At this very
time the chief of the Gimbahans, this unfortunate and enslaved race,
cherishes with respect and veneration his loving remembrance of Spain
and holds in his possession the proofs of what I assert. This fact
established, Mr. Consul-General, I am forcibly constrained to protest,
which I accordingly do, against every claim in its favor by your nation
on the terms of the said Article 7 of the treaty referred to of May
29th of the present year, since it prejudices the incontestable and
recognized rights of the crown of Spain to the sovereignty of the
territory of the island of Sulu and its surrounding islands, and to
its sovereignty over the present possessors of the coasts of this
archipelago, begging that you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this
letter in order to cover my responsibility to my Government. Receive,
again, Mr. Consul-General, the assurances, etc.


C. de Figueroa.

To Sir James Brooke, Consul-General for her Britannic Majesty in
Borneo and Governor of Labuan.


H. M. S. "Nemesis," June 5, 1849.--Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge
receipt of your communication; and as the matter in question will
probably have to be discussed between our respective Governments,
I think it better not to take up the objections raised by you in
connection with Article 7 of the treaty recently negotiated with
his Highness the Sultan of Sulu. I have the honor to be, with great
consideration, Sir, Your obedient servant.


Brooke, Commissioner and Consul-General.

To His Excellency, Col. C. de Figueroa, Governor of Zamboanga.


Military and Civil Government, Town of Zamboanga, No. 100, Government
Department.--Most Excellent Sir:--On reëmbarking at Malusu, March
31st last, returning from the operations which I had conducted against
the same on that same day, following instructions received from your
office in a communication of the 17th of the said month of May, the
result of which I reported to the most Excellent the Captain-General
in an official letter of the 2nd instant, No. 209, the war vessel of
the English East India Company, the "Nemesis" was sighted and soon
afterwards cast anchor in our vicinity. Aboard the vessel was Sir
James Brooke, Consul-General for his country in Borneo and Governor
of Labuan; and as a result of a long conference I had with the latter
gentleman in regard to recent events in Sulu--which conference it
was agreed to continue in this place immediately upon my arrival
here--I gave him, successively, the two communications of which I
attach copies; with them I send to your Excellency letters dated the
3rd and 5th instant replying to mine in terms that your Excellency
will see embodied in the two original letters of corresponding dates,
which I likewise enclose herewith, retaining copies of them, as also
an authorized copy of the treaty or agreement of the 29th of last
May, also enclosed; feeling confident that the indulgence of your
Excellency will approve my action in this delicate matter. May God
preserve your Excellency many years.


Zamboanga, June 6th, 1849.

Cayetano Figueroa.

The most Excellent, The Governor and Captain-General of the
Philippines.

Copies.--José María Peñaranda: (his flourish).


APPENDIX XVII

COMMUNICATION FROM THE SUPREME GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE
SECRETARY OF STATE, RELATIVE TO THE TREATY OF SIR JAMES BROOKE WITH
THE SULTAN OF SULU; AUGUST 16, 1849 [291]


Office of the Captain-General and Governor of the Philippines.

To his Excellency, The Secretary of State and of the Office of
Gobernación of the Kingdom, I have the honor to state the following,
on this date, and under No. 499.

By the communications which I had the honor to send your Excellency
from Zamboanga on the 23rd of June and 4th of July last, and that of
the General second in command, No. 482, your Excellency must have been
informed of the treaty which has been made in Jolo by the Englishman
Sir James Brooke, of the answer of the Governor of Zamboanga to the
latter and his negotiation with the Sultan and Datus to have the
treaty left without effect, without obtaining the least satisfaction.

It will therefore be necessary that the question be settled between the
two Cabinets, and I believe that Holland will take our part, as she has
an illfeeling against England on account of the latter's usurpations
in Borneo, contrary to the spirit of the treaty of March 17, 1824,
between the two countries, and must fear to see her rich possessions
surrounded by those of so powerful a rival. The communications of her
Majesty's Consul in Singapore and his confidential correspondence with
the Governor-General of Java, which he has forwarded to the Secretary
of State, show that the Dutch Government wishes to maintain the most
friendly relations with Spain. Although the English press in Singapore
and Hong-Kong are still speaking of a Dutch expedition against Jolo,
nothing has been done hitherto, and the favorable season for such an
expedition has passed.

As the correspondence between Brooke and the Governor of Zamboanga will
probably play an important part in the future correspondence with the
British Government, I believe it is my duty to submit a few remarks in
regard to the action taken by the said Governor. Notwithstanding that
the objections, which he submitted to Brooke in regard to Article 7
of the treaty, were well founded, he ought not to have entered upon
such a discussion, and much less to have particularized it in such
a way: he ought to have protested against the treaty as a whole,
and to have declared it null, as made without the consent of Spain,
which holds not only a protectorate, but sovereignty or dominion over
the territory. The second defect that I find in the same letter to
Brooke, is his basing our right to the sovereignty over Sulu on the
"free submission of the true natives of the Gimbahan race, who live
in the interior of the island and are oppressed by the Sultan and the
Datus." Although there is some truth in that statement, and we might
take advantage of this element in case of a war with the Sultan,
I believe that it ought not to have been made under the present
circumstances, as, on the same principle, we would invalidate the
rights founded by us on the different treaties made by Spain with the
Sultan and Datus of Sulu. The acknowledgment made by the latter of the
sovereignty of Spain during over two centuries and more especially in
the treaties of 1646, 1737 and 1836, by the first of which they pledge
themselves to pay, as vassals, a tribute of three boatloads of rice,
as recorded in the Archives, is a powerful argument in favor of our
rights, which the Sultan has often confirmed in his communications
to this Government and in the passports which he gives his subjects,
on printed forms supplied by my predecessor;--I enclose herewith a
copy of one of said passports.

The British, who doubtless do not feel very certain about their rights,
try to excuse their conduct through the press, as they did when they
occupied Labuan by force. The Singapore Free Press of the 6th of July
published an article in which it alleges, for the purpose of proving
that Sulu has always been considered as a sovereign independent power,
that we said nothing to England when she accepted the cession of the
island of Balambangan, between Borneo and Palawan. Even supposing
the fact to be true, there would be nothing astonishing about it,
considering the distress and the lack of means of the Government
at that time, after the war which, but a few years before, it had
miraculously carried on against the English who held Manila and many
other places in the islands, and the work it had to do in order to
put down interior rebellions, to reorganize the administration and to
reëstablish normal conditions in the provinces which had been left
uncontrolled during four years and had suffered the consequences of
circumstances so unfortunate. Furthermore, the cession of Balambangan
cannot be considered as an act of free will on the part of the Sulus,
since they took advantage of the first opportunity to drive the British
off the island, when they had hardly started to firmly establish
their trading posts. The newspaper also mentions the doctrine
of Walter, which says that an agreement similar to that existing
between the Spanish and Sulu Governments does not entirely derogate
the sovereignty of the protected state, which can make treaties and
contract alliances, except when it has expressly renounced its right
to do so; and that if the first state fails to protect the other, the
treaty is invalidated; the author of the article adds that this is our
case, since we allowed the Dutch to attack Sulu without interfering,
or, as far as known, requiring a reparation or the assurance that
such an attack would not be renewed.

With regard to the first point, the reference to Walter is correct,
but Walter adds in the same paragraph that "the protected nation is
bound forever by the treaty of protection, so that it can undertake
no engagements which would be contrary to said treaty, that is to say,
that would violate any of the express conditions of the protectorate,
or be inconsistent with any treaty of the said class:" how then
could Article 7 of the treaty made by Brooke be valid, when by said
article the Sultan pledges himself to recognize the sovereignty of
no power without the previous consent of her Britannic Majesty, and
not to cede the smallest part of the territory of his dominions to any
state, person or corporation, said Sultan having already recognized the
sovereignty of Spain and the rights of the latter over the greater part
of his territory, in which the island of Palawan, which was ceded to
us in the last century by the kings of Bruney is included by mistake.

In regard to the second point, the author of the article is also in
the wrong: for this Government was neither aware of the intentions
of the Dutch, nor was its assistance requested by the Sultan; and
your Excellency knows in what terms I wrote to the Governor-General
of Java about that matter.--If I have given so many details, despite
their not being new to your Excellency it is because the article of the
Singapore Free Press may have been inspired by the British Government,
and deserves therefore not to be left unnoticed.

In the event of which I am writing, your Excellency will see the
fulfilment of my predictions, and it may perhaps be only the prelude
of events of still greater importance.

Thus I cannot but earnestly recommend to your Excellency's notice
the necessity that the Governor of the Philippines have very
detailed instructions or very ample powers to proceed as regards
the Southern regions in accordance with what he believes best
suited to her Majesty's interests and to the security of these rich
possessions. In this connection I take the liberty of recommending to
your Excellency such action as our Sovereign the Queen may deem most
wise on my communication (consulta) number 359 and others relative
to the same subject.

Perhaps, as I mentioned in my communication of the 4th of July last,
the only advantageous issue for us would be to send a strong expedition
and to occupy Jolo, our action being warranted by the piratical acts
committed by several small boats of Bwal, Sulu; the Dutch may avail
themselves of the same excuse and send an expedition before us, if,
as is possible, other pancos [292] [Moro boats] have gone south for
the same purpose; but anyhow the behavior of the Sultan and Datus of
Sulu would give us excellent reasons for taking action against them
at any time.


God keep your Excellency many years.

Manila, August 16, 1849.

The Count of Manila.

His Excellency, the Secretary of State and "Gobernación."


APPENDIX XVIII

REGULATIONS RELATIVE TO TAXES AND IMPOSTS ON NATIVES AND IMMIGRANTS
IN SULU [293]


General Government of the Philippines, Treasury Department, Manila,
February 24th, 1877.


In view of the communications of the politico-military governor
of Sulu of October 6th of last year, in which he suggests to this
general government the concession of various exemptions in favor of
the natives of these islands and of any Chinamen who shall establish
themselves in the said place, to the end that by this means there may
be promoted the immigration which the interests of that island demand:

In view of the reports issued in the premises by the central
administration of imposts, the office of the insular auditor, [294] and
the insular departments of civil administration and the treasury: and

Deeming it expedient, for the realization of the high purposes that
required the military occupation of Jolo and for the progressive
and efficacious development of the moral and material interests of
this young colony, that there should be granted certain exemptions
for the encouragement of the immigration thereto of the greatest
possible number of inhabitants: this office of the general government
in conformity with the suggestions made by the treasury department,
and in accordance with the statements made by the department of civil
administration, disposes the following:

1. All immigrants to the island of Sulu, of whatever class, race,
or nationality, who shall establish themselves definitively in the
same, engaging in agricultural, industrial, or commercial pursuits,
or in any art, trade, or occupation, shall be exempt during ten years
from all the contributions or taxes imposed, or which in the future
may be imposed, upon the inhabitants of the Philippine Archipelago.

2. The children of immigrants to Sulu, born in said island or who
establish themselves there before becoming taxpayers in the pueblos
of their birth, shall commence to pay taxes at the age of twenty-five
years, but shall be exempt from military service so long as they
reside in the said island.

This decree shall be published in the Official Gazette and communicated
to the council of administration, the office of the captain-general,
and the insular department of civil administration; and shall be
returned to the treasury department for such further action as may
be proper.


    Malcampo.


General Government of the Philippines, Treasury Department, Manila,
August 10, 1887.


In view of the investigation conducted by the intendant-general
of the treasury with the object of determining whether it would be
expedient to prolong the term of exemption from all kinds of taxes
and imposts in favor of natives and of immigrants of whatever race or
nationality who are established, or who shall establish themselves,
in Sulu for the purpose of engaging in any kind of industry, commerce,
profession, art, or trade, or in agriculture:

In view of the reports issued by the said directive bureau of the
treasury and the politico-military governor of Sulu:

And considering that exemption from all burdens constitutes one of
the most efficacious means of encouraging the immigration demanded by
the interest of the archipelago in question; this general government,
in conformity with the suggestions made by the office of the intendant
of the treasury and the politico-military governor of Sulu, disposes
that the term of exemption granted by superior decree of this general
government of February 24th, 1877, shall be understood as extended
for another term of ten years, the said extension to be reckoned
from the day following that on which the first term expires, that is,
from the 25th day of February of the current year.

This decree shall be published in the Official Gazette; the Government
of his Majesty shall be informed thereof and a copy of the records
transmitted; it shall be communicated to the council of administration,
the tribunal of accounts, the office of the Captain-General, and the
insular department of civil administration; and shall be returned to
the office of the intendant of the treasury for any further action
that may be proper.


    Terrero.


Office of the Governor-General of the Philippines.

Most excellent and most illustrious Sir: The politico-military governor
of Sulu, in a communication dated the 9th instant, states as follows:


    Most excellent Sir: As the time expiration of the exemptions
    granted to Sulu and its port by decree of the general government
    under the able direction of your Excellency, dated February 24th,
    1877, and extended by superior order issued from the same office
    for another term of ten years, on August 23rd, 1887, is drawing
    near, the person who has the honor to sign hereunder believes
    that the moment has come to call the attention of your Excellency
    to the matter, and he takes the liberty to set down some remarks
    in the premises, to the end that when your Excellency determines
    what is deemed most expedient, they may be taken under advisement.

    In the exemptions granted to Sulu, it must be borne in mind that
    they affect two distinct elements, which constitute the life
    and favor the development of this locality. Some have reference
    to the exemption from all taxes, tributes, and gabels imposed,
    or to be imposed, in favor of natives or foreigners taking up
    their abode in the Sulu archipelago. Others refer exclusively
    to the declaration of a free port, with exemption from all taxes
    and customs formalities in favor of the capital of the island.

    In treating this question and in considering what ought to be done
    in the future, when the moment arrives for determining whether
    a fresh extension is expedient, or whether, on the contrary,
    this territory must enter upon the normal administrative life
    general in other localities of the Philippine Archipelago,
    the subject must be dealt with under the two aspects above
    set forth. In regard to the declaration of freedom of the port
    granted to Jolo, it is undoubtedly expedient to continue it for
    the present without change. So long as the protocol entered into
    with the other nations who are parties thereto, continues in
    force--in which protocol our incontestable right of sovereignty
    over this archipelago, with the limitations therein stipulated,
    is declared--it would be highly impolitic to close the period
    of franchise granted to this port. Should there be established
    the embarrassing obstacles and difficulties to commerce entailed
    by the formalities of customs regulations, the English steamers
    which now carry on the trade with Singapore, would immediately
    cease to visit this port and would make their destination some
    other port of the island, where, under the provisions of the
    protocol above referred to, no one could lawfully obstruct them
    until after the effective occupation of the new port selected for
    trading operations, and until after having allowed to elapse the
    requisite time subsequent to publishing this resolution in the
    official papers of the Peninsula. The distinguished intelligence
    of your Excellency will perceive easily that after this had been
    repeated several times, we should find ourselves compelled either
    to occupy effectively all the islands of the Sulu archipelago where
    English steamers might attempt to establish their business, or,
    in the end, to allow them to carry on their commercial operations
    at any place that suited them, which, without doubt, would be much
    more prejudicial than what happens at the present time; for, at
    any rate, so long as steamers come exclusively to this port or to
    that of Siasi, as is the case at present, the trade can be watched
    easily and conveniently and without the commercial operations which
    are carried on giving rise to diplomatic questions; it is easy,
    also to prevent the traffic of arms and war supplies, which would
    not be the case if they touched at other points where our sphere of
    action is not so direct and effective. Furthermore, the advantages
    of the present situation must also be taken into account. So long
    as these steamers touch only at Jolo and Siasi, as happens now,
    these two points are the only markets, whither all the people of
    the archipelago must necessarily go to trade, not only to supply
    themselves with the effects which they import and are necessary
    to life, but also to sell all the products they gather in their
    fields and in the seas, which constitute the element of commerce
    that justifies English vessels in visiting these regions, making it
    possible to collect sufficient freight to maintain the two regular
    lines now established. It is obvious that, since we are masters
    of the towns of Jolo and Siasi--the only points of distribution
    for effects necessary to the life of the natives here--we can,
    when we consider it expedient, prevent the sale of these effects
    to the villages hostile to the city, a most momentous advantage
    resulting therefrom and a means of government of inestimable
    value. So long as the Moros have to supply themselves from these
    markets, our importance is incontestable; all their outbreaks
    are easily checked without appeal to violent methods; and the
    civilizing effect which results from the constant intercourse
    which is necessitated by their coming to the occupied ports, is
    extended, thereby modifying the sanguinary and turbulent habits of
    this race. If the revenues from the duties which would be imposed
    were of sufficient importance to cover the expenses entailed by
    the occupation of Sulu, the arguments supporting the opinion
    above expressed could easily be set aside. But unfortunately
    there can not be expected from the custom house of Jolo, in the
    event of its establishment, even the expenses necessary to cover
    the salaries of the personnel engaged therein. For, the foreign
    steamers which now visit this port would immediately discontinue
    their voyages, and even though it were possible to prevent them
    from making port at some other place for the purpose of carrying
    on their mercantile operations--a thing which would not be easy so
    long as the treaty is in force--what would happen? Why, that the
    trade would be continued by means of smaller boats which would
    come from Borneo, and it would not be feasible to prevent this
    except by the posting of a very large number of coastguards along
    the shores of the innumerable islands of Sulu, a method which
    it would be altogether impossible to adopt. It is, therefore,
    unquestionably expedient to maintain the present status, whether
    the matter be considered under its economic aspect or under that
    of the policy it is necessary to develop in this territory. A
    very different course must, in the opinion of the undersigned,
    be followed in the matter of the exemption from taxation granted
    to the inhabitants of Sulu. These exists here a numerous Chinese
    colony, which is the element that really enjoys the benefit of
    the advantages flowing from the present free-port conditions,
    and it is neither just nor equitable that, while the Chinese find
    in us the support and protection which enable them to carry on
    and develop the trade in which they alone engage, they should not
    contribute in any way towards the expenses of the Government which
    furnishes them so many advantages. It is, therefore, expedient
    to impose upon all Chinaman residing in the Sulu territory the
    obligation to pay the same taxes as are paid by those of the same
    race in other parts of the Philippines. The establishment of this
    system promises not only the profit of the sums which would be
    collected as a consequence thereof, but also the desideratum of
    introducing order into the anarchical manner of life obtaining
    among the Chinese here. As soon as the obligation to pay taxes
    is imposed upon all and the lists of tax-payers are made up,
    individual interest will see to it that all persons living in
    the country are included therein; for it is unquestionable that,
    since each desires to be placed under the same conditions as the
    other, the Chinamen themselves will be of very great assistance
    in discovering those who now are not included in the incomplete
    and untrustworthy census lists existing in the offices of the
    Government of Sulu. It is believed, then, that it is expedient
    and just to discontinue the franchise now enjoyed by the Chinese
    here, and that they should begin to contribute at once towards
    defraying the expenses of the treasury, paying at least as much as
    is paid by their countrymen in other parts of the Philippines. It
    would appear also equitable that the Indians residing here should
    also begin to pay the cédulas [295] of the class to which they
    respectively belong; but there must be borne in mind the limited
    number of individuals of this race residing here; the expediency
    of encouraging by this means the immigration of fresh residents;
    and, above all, the services they render in any case of alarm,
    whether caused by juramentados or by more serious aggressions
    attempted against the city; all of which circumstances make it
    proper that they should continue enjoying the exemption from
    the payment of poll-tax which they now enjoy, as also exemption
    from all the other taxes upon the insignificant industries from
    which they gain a subsistence. The treasury could not hope for
    any happy results in this direction; and, on the other hand, if
    such a tax were imposed, the place would, in a very short time,
    be left entirely without any civilian population; for only with
    difficulty, and thanks to the franchises, can persons be found
    who will face the constant danger in which residents in Jolo are
    placed--especially those who engage in the cultivation of the
    soil in the outskirts of the town; of which class the civilian
    population is, in a very large majority, composed.

    It remains, only, most excellent Sir, to discuss the expediency,
    or otherwise, of establishing taxation upon commerce, industry,
    and property. All the urban property of Jolo is in the hands of
    the Chinese, with so few exceptions that there are not more than
    three property holders who do not belong to that race. In their
    hands is all the commerce, with the sole exception of two Spanish
    houses: every thing relating to business is in their power; so
    that any burden imposed in this direction would not be borne by
    them, but would be paid by the garrison of Jolo. For, united as
    the Chinamen are in every thing that relates to the avoidance of
    tax-paying, they would come to a perfect understanding to surtax
    every thing,--not in the same proportion as the contributions
    they would pay, but with a considerable increase, with the
    result that the only tax-payer to the treasury and for the
    Chinaman would be the unfortunate inhabitant of Jolo. And since
    the population here consists almost entirely of the garrison,
    which renders such arduous services at this place, I believe
    that it would not be just to add to the other disadvantages that
    the service here offers, the very serious one that would result
    from the imposition of taxes in this capital. Furthermore, one
    must not lose sight of what might happen or rather what would
    immediately happen, when, by taxing the commerce of the city,
    the majority of the Chinamen now established here would go to
    Maymbung, with a tendency to store their merchandise at other
    important points in the island, in which places our rule is, it
    may be said, nominal, and it is unnecessary to insist upon the
    undesirable consequences that would follow; for we should return
    to the condition in which Maymbung stood in April of the year
    1887, when this town was a very important center of resistence
    to our rule, due to the facility afforded in that place for the
    purchase of unlimited arms and ammunition, a business carried
    on by the foreign steamers who anchored there at that time. And
    all this without taking into account the undesirability, from a
    political point of view, of affording the Moros the opportunity
    of purchasing their supplies at prices lower than those in this
    city; since, if the merchants in that town did not pay taxes
    they would be able to sell at lower prices than those in the
    capital. Summing up what I have stated above and recapitulating
    the questions herein treated, I will conclude by submitting to
    the distinguished intelligence of your Excellency that I consider
    necessary and of the highest political expediency the maintenance
    of the freedom of the port granted to Jolo; that this franchise
    should be extended to Siasi, which enjoys this privilege in fact
    though not by right; and that care should be taken to prevent the
    slightest obstacle from interfering with the trade at both points,
    to the end that foreign steamers may, in their own interest,
    touch only at these two points of the archipelago of Sulu; that
    the Chinamen should be formed into guilds or associations, after
    the pattern of the organizations prevailing in other parts of the
    Philippines, these being necessary, further, to the making up of
    the lists of tax-payers; that, as a consequence of the formation
    of these associations, they should be compelled to pay taxes to
    the same extent as all other Chinamen residing in the country,
    unless your Excellency is of the opinion that the quota should
    be increased in consideration of the other advantages they enjoy;
    that there should be imposed a tax upon smokers of opium and upon
    the importation thereof. This tax would be a source of revenue of
    some consideration if it were farmed, as was the intention four
    years ago, when sale to the highest bidder was desisted from in
    view of the decree of franchises which is the subject of this
    communication. Finally, that property, commerce, and industries
    should not be taxed, nor should the civilian population be burdened
    with the poll-tax, since the latter deserve consideration by
    reason of the arduous services they render in this place; and
    this applies to the garrison, as well as to the civilians who
    make up the town, who, in the end, would be the persons who
    alone would have to bear these burdens. Such, most excellent
    Sir, is the opinion, expressed as succinctly as possible, of the
    undersigned in regard to these matters, which, at no distant date,
    will present themselves for resolution and which your Excellency
    will determine with your well-known ability and good judgment.

    Which I have the pleasure to transmit to your most Illustrious
    Excellency, to the end that you may take note of the part relating
    to the economic side of this question.


    God preserve your most illustrious Excellency for many years.

    Manila, July 31st, 1896.

    Blanco.

    To the most excellent and most illustrious the Intendant-General
    of the Treasury.


Office of the Intendant-General of the Treasury Division of Direct
Imposts

Most excellent and most illustrious Sir: The just considerations set
forth by the politico-military governor of Sulu in a communication
addressed to his high Excellency the Governor-General of these islands
on July 9th of last year, forwarded to your most illustrious Lordship
on the 31st of the same month and year, reveal a close study of the
questions treated, based upon practice and experience.

The chief of the division of direct imposts, who signs hereunder,
in presenting the report ordered by your most illustrious Lordship
in your decree of the first day of the following August, must begin
by expressing at once his conformity with the views given by the
governor of Sulu, in the part relating to this division.

Undoubtedly considerations of the highest political moment led the
high authorities of the Archipelago, on August 23rd of 1887, to extend
for another term of ten years the franchises granted to Sulu, and
since these considerations have not ceased to be of moment, to judge
from the enlightened views expressed by the said politico-military
governor, it is to be presumed that it is expedient to grant a fresh
concession of franchises; but not, at this time, for a period of time
equal to that about to expire, though for a period that might well be
half that of the previous term; for, regarding the matter prudently,
it might happen that during this lapse of time the conditions in
the places under discussion should alter in such a way as to counsel
either the total suppression of the liberties in question or their
partial modification.

But if there are considerations in favor of this new concession,
equity counsels that there be excluded therefrom the Chinese in so far
as relates to the imposition of the poll-tax, since they control all
the business and are the only persons who really exploit that region.

Consequently, the chief of the division of direct imposts has the
honor to report to your most illustrious Lordship:

1. That it be recommended to his high Excellency the Governor-General
of these Islands, that, to take the place of the present franchises,
there be granted again, at the proper time, to the ports of Jolo and
Siasi, the exemption from the payment of all urban and industrial taxes
in favor of the natives and of the Chinese established at those points.

2. That there be created at once the imposition of the poll-tax upon
the Chinese.

3. That the natives and the civilian population be exempt from the
payment of poll-tax.

Your most illustrious Lordship will, however, determine whatever he
deems most expedient.


Manila, August 6th, 1897.

Marcelino Pacheco.


Office of the Intendant-General of the Treasury Division of Indirect
Imposts

Most excellent and most illustrious Sir: In compliance with the
decree which, under date of August 10 of the current year, your
most illustrious Excellency saw fit to issue, to the effect that, in
the shortest possible space of time the divisions of imposts should
report upon the matters concerning each one in the proceedings set
on foot by the politico-military governor of Sulu in regard to the
expediency or the inexpediency of the renewal of the exemption from
taxation enjoyed by the natives in that place, I have to state to
your illustrious Excellency that:

1. The undersigned chief, fully agreeing with the enlightened views set
forth by the governor of Sulu, believes that the maintenance of the
declaration of freedom of the port granted to Jolo is of the highest
political moment and that the franchise should be extended to Siasi.

2. That in regard to indirect imposts which are of such a nature that,
while they are a source of profit to the state, they bring also no
small benefit to the tax-payer, these should be made applicable to
the Sulu archipelago, as undoubtedly has been the case, as a matter
of fact, up to the present time in regard to the stamp and lottery
revenues.

3. Both for the reasons set forth by the governor of Sulu as well
as for these given by his predecessor on June 11, 1893, in favor of
a tax upon opium smokers, the undersigned chief believes that it is
not only just but a matter of the greatest necessity to continue the
imposition of this tax.

Your most illustrious Excellency will, however, order whatever he
deems most expedient.


Manila, September 10th, 1897.

José Garcés de Marcilla.


Office of the Intendant-General of the Treasury,

Manila, December 28, 1897.


Let the report of the Chamber of Commerce and of the administration
of customs of Manila be heard, within one and the same period of
five days.


Dominguez.


APPENDIX XIX

THE PROTOCOL OF SULU, OF 1877, BETWEEN SPAIN, GERMANY, AND GREAT
BRITAIN, MAY 30, 1877 [296]


General Government of the Philippines

Royal Order

Colonial office.--No. 281.--Excellent Sir: The Secretary of State sent
the following communication to this office on the 26th of March last:
By Royal order communicated by the Secretary of State and for such
action as is indicated therein I deliver herewith to your Excellency a
copy of the protocol signed on the 11th inst. by Señor Manuel Silvela,
Secretary of State, and by the representatives of Great Britain and
Germany, for the purpose of establishing the liberty of trade and
commerce in the Sulu seas; said protocol takes effect on this date,
as specified in Article 5 of the same.--Referred to your Excellency
by Royal order with a copy of the protocol, for its execution.--God
keep your Excellency many years.


Madrid, April 2, 1877.

Martin de Herrera. The Governor-General of the Philippine Islands.

Manila, May 30, 1877. The above order shall be executed, communicated
and published. Moriones.


[Protocol referred to.]

The Hon. Austin Henry Layard, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of her Britannic Majesty; and Count Von Hatzfeldt,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the
Emperor of Germany, commissioned by their respective Governments to
terminate the difficulties which have occurred in the Sulu seas and to
establish for that purpose, in a final way, the liberty of commerce
in those seas, acknowledged by the Secretary of State of Spain in
the Notes which he sent on April 15, 1876, to the representatives of
Great Britain and Germany;

After having examined with due attention the preliminaries of the
question and especially the negotiations formerly carried on between
the Governments of Great Britain and Germany and that of Spain,
have agreed to draw up the following Protocol:

The Secretary of State of Spain, in the name of his Government, says:

Considering the preliminary fact that the German ships "Marie Louise"
and "Gazelle" were returned and an indemnity paid for their cargoes
in 1873 and 1874, and that the German ship "Minna" was returned twice
in 1875 and 1874;

Duly appreciating the increasing requirements of navigation and
commerce, and above all the legal status constituted by the Notes of
the Spanish Secretary of State dated the 15th of April last and by
the official publication of said Notes by the Governments of Great
Britain and Germany, as also by the instructions given accordingly
by said Governments to their consuls, agents and commanders of their
naval forces;

Therefore the Government of his Majesty the King of Spain recognizes
that the merchant ships going to the Sulu archipelago can no longer
be required to call first at Zamboanga, to pay the harbor dues there
and to provide themselves with a navigation permit delivered at said
port. It furthermore believes that it must acknowledge, as provided
in the Notes of the 15th of April last, the complete liberty of
direct trade and commerce for ships and subjects of Great Britain,
the German Empire and the other powers, with the Sulu archipelago.

Considering that the Governments of Great Britain and of Germany have
maintained all their claims in regard to the liberty of navigation,
commerce and direct trade with the Sulu archipelago and within the
archipelago; that the Government of his Majesty the King of Spain
admits that it cannot guarantee the security of commerce at unoccupied
places of the archipelago in return for duties and dues paid, but will
guarantee perfect security to the ships and subjects of Great Britain,
Germany and the other powers at places occupied by said Government,
and provide the establishments necessary for the protection of their
trade, the Spanish Secretary of State remarks that there is no reason
why said ships and subjects should be exempted, at places occupied by
Spain, from the formalities, general regulations, and ordinary duties,
whose nature will be explained in the present Protocol.

The undersigned representatives of Great Britain and of Germany refer,
on their part, to the Notes and official communications sent by them
on this matter to the Spanish Government, and requesting the latter to
acknowledge the absolute liberty of commerce and trade in all parts
of the Sulu archipelago, said acknowledgment having been mentioned
by the Spanish Government in the Notes of April 15, 1876.

In consequence of what precedes and as the result of their conferences,
the undersigned have agreed on the following declarations:

I

Commerce and direct trading by ships and subjects of Great Britain,
Germany and the other powers are declared to be and shall be absolutely
free with the Sulu archipelago and in all parts thereof, as well as the
right of fishery, without prejudice to the rights recognized to Spain
by the present Protocol, in conformity with the following declarations:

II

The Spanish authorities shall no longer require ships and subjects
of Great Britain, Germany and the other powers, going freely to
the archipelago of Sulu, or from one point to another within the
Sulu waters, or from such a point to any other point in the world,
to touch, before or after, at any specified place in the archipelago
or elsewhere, to pay any duties whatsoever, or to get a permit from
said authorities, which, on their side, shall refrain from obstructing
or interfering in any way with the above mentioned trade.

It is understood that the Spanish authorities shall in no way and under
no pretense prevent the free importation and exportation of all sorts
of goods, without exception, save at such places as are occupied,
and in accordance with Declaration III, and that in all places not
occupied effectively by Spain, neither the ships and subjects above
mentioned nor their goods shall be liable to any tax, duty or payment
whatsoever, or any sanitary or other regulation.

III

In the places occupied by Spain in the archipelago of Sulu the Spanish
Government shall be empowered to establish taxes and sanitary and
other regulations, while said places are effectively occupied; but
Spain pledges herself, on her part, to provide in such places the
offices and employees necessary to meet the requirements of commerce
and the application of said regulations. It is however expressly
understood that the Spanish Government, while it is resolved to impose
no restrictive regulations in the places occupied by it, pledges itself
voluntarily not to establish in said places taxes or duties exceeding
those provided in the Spanish tariffs or in the treaties or conventions
between Spain and any other power. Neither shall it put into force
in said places exceptional regulations applicable to the commerce
and subjects of Great Britain, Germany and the other powers. In case
Spain should occupy effectively other places in the archipelago of
Sulu, and provide thereat the offices and employees necessary to
meet the requirements of commerce, the Governments of Great Britain
and Germany shall not object to the application of the rules already
stipulated for places occupied at present. But, in order to avoid the
possibility of new claims due to the uncertainty of business men in
regard to the places which are occupied and subject to regulations and
tariffs, the Spanish Government shall, whenever a place is occupied
in the Sulu archipelago, communicate the fact to the Governments of
Great Britain and Germany, and inform commerce at large by means of
a notification which shall be published in the official journals of
Madrid and Manila. In regard to the tariffs and regulations stipulated
for places which are occupied at the present time, they shall only be
applicable to the places which may be subsequently occupied by Spain
six months after the date of publication in the Official Gazette of
Madrid. It remains agreed that no ship or subject of Great Britain,
Germany and other powers shall be required to call at one of the
occupied places, when going to or from a place not occupied by Spain,
and that they shall not be liable to suffer prejudice on that account
or on account of any class of merchandise shipped to an unoccupied
place in the archipelago.

IV

The three Governments represented by the undersigned pledge themselves
respectively to publish the present declarations and to have them
strictly respected by their representatives, consular agents and
commanders of the naval forces in the seas of the Orient.

V

If the Governments of Great Britain and Germany do not refuse their
adhesion to the present Protocol within 15 days from this date, or if
they notify their acceptance before the expiration of said period,
through their undersigned representatives, the present Declarations
shall then come into force.


Manuel Silva, Secretary of State of His Majesty the King of Spain.

Done at Madrid, the 11th of March, 1877.

A true copy.--Madrid, April 2, 1877.--A true copy.--The Subsecretary,
Francisco Rubio.


APPENDIX XX

THE PROTOCOL OF SULU OF 1885, BETWEEN SPAIN, GERMANY, AND GREAT
BRITAIN, MARCH 7, 1885 [297]


General Government of the Philippines

Royal Order

Foreign Office.--No. 312.--Excellent Sir: The Secretary of State sends
me the following communication on March 29th, 1885:--Excellent Sir: I
have the honor to forward you a translated copy of the protocol between
Spain, Germany and Great Britain, the latter two nations recognizing
the sovereignty of the first over the archipelago of Sulu, signed in
Madrid on the 7th of March, 1885.--I send you this communication by
Royal order, and enclose a copy of the treaty referred to. God keep
your Excellency many years.--Madrid, April 8, 1885.--Tejada.

Manila, June 17, 1885.--To be executed and published in the Official
Gazette.


Terrero.


A seal which says: Office of the Minister of State.--Translation.--The
undersigned, his Excellency Señor José Elduayen, Marquis of Pazo
de la Merced, Minister of State of his Majesty the King of Spain;
His Excellency Señor Count Solms Sonnerwalds, Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the Emperor of Germany,
and His Excellency Sir Robert B. D. Morier, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of her Britannic Majesty, authorized in due
form to carry on the negotiations followed in London and Berlin during
the years 1881 and 1882 by the representatives of his Majesty the
King of Spain with the Governments of Great Britain and Germany, for
the purpose of obtaining from these two powers the solemn recognition
of the sovereignty of Spain over the archipelago of Sulu, have agreed
on the following articles:

I

The Governments of Germany and Great Britain recognize the sovereignty
of Spain over the parts which are effectively occupied as well as
over those which are not yet occupied, of the archipelago of Sulu,
whose limits are established in Article II.

II

As expressed in Article I of the treaty signed on September 23, 1836,
between the Spanish Government and the Sultan of Sulu, the archipelago
of Sulu includes all the islands between the western extremity of the
island of Mindanao on one side and the mainland of Borneo and the
island of Palawan on the other, except those mentioned in Article
III. It is understood that the islands of Balabak and Kagayan Sulu
belong to the archipelago.

III

The Spanish Government renounces, as far as regards the British
Government, all claims of sovereignty over the territories of the
mainland of Borneo which belong or may have belonged to the Sultan
of Sulu, including the neighboring islands of Balambangan, Banguey,
Malawati, and all those comprised within a zone of three maritime
leagues from the coast, and which are part of the territories
administered by the company known as "The British North Borneo
Company."

IV

The Spanish Government pledges itself to carry out in the archipelago
of Sulu the stipulations contained in Articles I, II, and III of the
protocol signed in Madrid on March 11, 1877, viz.: (1) Commerce and
direct trading by ships and subjects of Great Britain, Germany and the
other powers are declared to be and shall be absolutely free with the
archipelago of Sulu and in all parts thereof, as well as the right
of fishery, without prejudice to the rights recognized to Spain by
the present Protocol, in conformity with the following declarations:
(2) The Spanish authorities shall no longer require ships and subjects
of Great Britain, Germany and the other powers, going freely to the
archipelago of Sulu, or from one point to another point in the world,
to touch, before or after, at any specified place in the archipelago
or elsewhere, to pay any duties whatsoever, or to get a permit from
said authorities, who, on their side, shall refrain from obstructing
or interfering in any way with the above mentioned trade.

It is understood that the Spanish authorities shall in no way and
under no pretense prevent the free importation and exportation of
all sorts of goods, without exception, save at such places as are
occupied, and in accordance with Declaration 3, and that in all places
not occupied effectively by Spain, neither the ships and subjects
above mentioned nor their goods shall be subject to any tax, duty
or payment whatsoever, or any sanitary or other regulation. (3) In
the places occupied by Spain in the archipelago of Sulu, the Spanish
Government shall be empowered to establish taxes and sanitary and
other regulations, while said places are effectively occupied; but
Spain pledges herself, on her part, to provide in such places the
offices and employees necessary to meet the requirements of commerce
and the application of said regulations. It is however expressly
understood that the Spanish Government, which is resolved to impose
no restrictive regulations in the places occupied by it, pledges
itself voluntarily not to establish in said places taxes or duties
exceeding those provided in the Spanish tariffs or in the treaties
or conventions between Spain and any other power. Neither shall it
put into force in said places exceptional regulations applicable to
the commerce and subjects of Great Britain, Germany and the other
powers. In case Spain should occupy effectively other places in the
archipelago of Sulu, and provide thereat the offices and employees
necessary to meet the requirements of commerce, the Governments of
Great Britain and Germany shall not object to the application of
the rules already stipulated for places occupied at present. But in
order to avoid the possibility of new claims due to the uncertainty of
business men in regard to the places which are occupied and subject
to regulations and tariffs, the Spanish Government shall, whenever a
place is occupied in the Sulu archipelago, communicate the fact to
the Governments of Great Britain and Germany, and inform commerce
at large by means of a notification which shall be published in the
Official Gazettes of Madrid and Manila. In regard to the tariffs
and regulations stipulated for places which are occupied at the
present time, they shall only be applicable to the places which
may be subsequently occupied by Spain six months after the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of Madrid.

It remains agreed that no ship or subject of Great Britain, Germany
and the other powers shall be required to call at one of the occupied
places, when going to or coming from a place not occupied by Spain,
and that they shall not be liable to suffer prejudice on that account
or on account of any class of merchandise addressed to an unoccupied
place in the archipelago.

V

The Government of her Britannic Majesty pledges itself to see
that there is entire freedom of commerce and navigation, without
distinction of flags, in the territory of North Borneo administered
by the "British North Borneo Company."

If the Governments of Great Britain and Germany do not refuse their
adhesion to the present protocol within fifteen days from this date,
or if they notify their acceptance before the expiration of said
period, through their undersigned representatives, the present
declarations shall then come into force. Done at Madrid the 7th
of March, 1885.--Seal.--(Signed) J. Elduayen.--Seal.--(Signed)
C. Solms.--Seal.--(Signed) R. B. D. Morier.


APPENDIX XXI

DECREE OF THE GENERAL GOVERNMENT IN REGARD TO PAYMENT OF TRIBUTE BY
SULUS, MARCH 1, 1894 [298]


Office of the Governor-General of the Philippines, Manila, March
1, 1894.


In view of the obligation incurred by the Sultan of Sulu by virtue
of which the Moros of all the Sulu archipelago have to pay from the
first day of January of next year, one real each, as a tribute of
vassalage; and since it is necessary to organize this service in a
regular manner and in harmony with the customs of the races living
there, I decree the following:

1. The Sultan of Sulu shall direct at once all the Datus and Chiefs
of the Moro rancherias [299] to make up lists of the names of the
inhabitants composing each aggregation, giving therein, besides the
names, the status of each individual.

2. These partial lists shall be fused in one single general census
which the Sultan of Sulu shall deliver to the politico-military
governor of that archipelago before October 1, of the current year.

3. The interpreters of Jolo, Siasi, Tata'an, and Bangao shall assist
the Sultan in the work of making up these lists and shall translate
them into Spanish; and for this extra work they shall receive the
allowances designated below, the amounts being deducted from the
total proceeds of the liege-money above referred to.


    Allowances

    To the interpreter of Jolo       P20   per month.
    To the junior linguist of Jolo   P 6   Do.
    To the interpreter of Siasi      P 8   Do.
    To the interpreter of Tata'an    P 8   Do.
    To the interpreter of Bangao     P 8   Do.


4. As soon as the lists are completed and have been examined by the
politico-military governor of Sulu, certified copies shall be sent
to this office.

5. The collection of the tribute shall be made by means of certain
special cedulas, which in due time will be furnished to the Sultan for
distribution, who will collect the amounts paid in and deliver them
over in specie at the office of the politico-military governor of Sulu.

6. The total proceeds from the said tribute, after deducting the
amount of the allowances to the interpreters, shall be devoted for
the present to the development of the establishments of Jolo, and
especially to the construction of roads.

To be communicated.


Blanco.


APPENDIX XXII

ROYAL COMMUNICATION RELATIVE TO THE RIGHTS OF FOREIGNERS ON THE PEARL
FISHERIES OF SULU [300]


Manila, December 25, 1895. His high Excellency the Minister of
Colonial Affairs.


Excellent Sir: In compliance with the Royal order communicated
under date of the 23rd of October last, I have the honor to send
to your Excellency a copy of the previous record of investigations
transmitted by the office of this General Government, together with
the report of the office of the secretary, the remittance of which
your Excellency requests.

The inquiry formulated by the politico-military governor of Sulu,
arising out of a resolution of the fishery board of the naval station
relative to the order prohibiting foreign subjects from engaging in
the pearl fisheries in the waters of the Sulu archipelago, did not call
for a speedy resolution nor a close study, it being sufficient to bring
the matter to the knowledge of your Excellency without entering deeply
into the question involved, in order not to prejudice the resolution of
the same, leaving to the supreme judgment of his Majesty's Government
the entire appreciation of its reach and consequences, as the only
authority acquainted with the demands of our international relations
and the influence thereon of a decision in regard to a matter of such
recognized importance as is that of the interpretation to be given
to Declaration I of the Sulu Protocol of May 11th of 1877, contained
in Article IV of the Protocol between Spain, Germany, and Great
Britain, signed in Madrid on March 7th, 1885:--hence the brevity of
the data contained in the communications above referred to and even
the forbearance of this office from expressing a concrete opinion
(in any case, not called for) in regard to a question as vital as it
is complex. But circumstances, which are always superior to every will
and every calculation, now make prompt action necessary, and not only
forbid any delay, but impose upon this General Government the duty
of emitting an opinion which shall complement the data furnished
by the office of the secretary of the same, which data were less
extensive and explicit than they would certainly have been had not a
respect for the free initiative of the Supreme Government acted as
a restraining influence. The incident arising out of the presence
in the city of Jolo of the British subject Mr. H. W. Dalton, from
Sandakan, awaiting the arrival of a fleet of boats of light tonnage
belonging to the English concern, The Pearling and Trading Co. Ltd.,
[301] of which he is the representative for the purpose of using the
same in the mother-of-pearl shell fishery, which fact I communicated
to your Excellency by cablegram on the 3rd of the current month,
makes more urgent the sovereign decision in regard to the concrete
point as to whether foreign subjects are allowed to engage in the
pearl fishery in the archipelago of Sulu.

In the judgment of this office (which has, on various occasions,
inspired only by a regard for the best interests of the nation,
expressed the opinion that the Sulu Protocol is too prejudicial to
the said interests to permit of the points of doubtful interpretation
in the same being interpreted liberally), the point in regard to the
right of fishery which foreigners lay claim to exercise freely in
waters under the jurisdiction of our sovereignty, is not a doubtful
one at all, but is entirely contrary to their pretensions. The claims
are founded, according to the statements of those who agree with the
views which they involve, in Declaration I of the said Protocol of
1877, reproduced in the Protocol of 1885 and in that signed in Rome
in the same year, relating to the Caroline and Pelew Archipelagoes.

This declaration runs as follows--ratified by Article IV of the second
of these important diplomatic documents:


    The direct commerce and trade of boats and subjects of Great
    Britain, of Germany, and of the other powers, is declared, and
    shall be, absolutely free in the archipelago of Sulu and in all
    its parts, as also the right of fishery, without prejudice to the
    rights recognized as belonging to Spain in the present Protocol,
    in conformity with the following declarations * * *.

    III. At points occupied by Spain in the archipelago of Sulu, the
    Spanish Government may establish imposts, and sanitary and other
    regulations of whatever kind, during the effective occupation of
    the said points * * *.


From the transcript it is evident that Spain may regulate the
exercise of the right of traffic and commerce, not with the purpose
of restricting, and much less of denying, the principle of commercial
liberty recognized in Declaration I, but with that of conditioning
the exercise of that right in such a way that her own rights as
a sovereign nation shall not be infringed. And what she may do in
regard to mercantile trade, with greater reason she may and should
do in everything referring to the right of fishery, a right which is
declared only in general terms, and one of which the protocol does
not treat except in making the affirmation of the principle itself,
whereas in regard to commerce, it descends to minute details.

And this could not be otherwise, for anything else would be equivalent
to impairing the sovereignty of Spain; and this, in an agreement in
which this sovereignty is openly recognized and proclaimed, would
pre-suppose a contradiction so palpable and absurd that it is not
worth while even to discuss it.

Spain, as a sovereign and independent state, holds and exercises her
sovereignty not only in her territories and on the coasts of the same,
but in her jurisdictional waters, and can, therefore, regulate the
exercise therein of any right granted to foreign subjects, and may,
even, in the exercise of her sovereignty, prohibit the enjoyment
of such right altogether; this is an indisputable principle of
international law, though there is nothing to prevent a state from
limiting the same in favor of another or other states; but it is a
sine qua non condition to this that there shall be an express and clear
declaration of her will on this point, and no one can reasonably affirm
that Spain has made in the Sulu Protocols, neither in that of 1877, nor
in that of 1885, a total or partial surrender of this right in regard
to that of fishery; there is, it is true, a declaration in general
terms that the fisheries are absolutely free in the archipelago of
Sulu; but this absoluteness of the principle is immediately qualified
by the condition that it shall be without prejudice to the rights
recognized as belonging to Spain in the protocol, and it has already
been pointed out that one of these rights--the principal one and
that which contains all the others, the right of sovereignty--is
proclaimed and recognized at the head of the agreement. Outside this
declaration in general terms, there will not be found in all the
protocol a provision or regulation referring to the exercise of the
right of fishery and much less a concrete and express declaration on
the part of Spain that she will permit the exercise thereof freely on
her coasts and in her territorial waters. To permit of this a concrete,
clear, and definite declaration would be necessary, such as is to be
found in the Morocco Treaty, signed on November 30, 1861, Article 57
of which establishes qualifiedly "That Spanish subjects shall have a
right to fish along the coasts of the Moroccan Empire;" and even so,
in Article 60 of the same treaty, it is stipulated that, in order to
facilitate the coral fishery, in which the Spaniards engage on the
coast of Morocco, fishers shall pay the sum of 150 Spanish dollars for
each coral fishing boat, and that through the representative of Spain
they shall request permission from the minister of foreign affairs
of His Majesty the Sultan who shall issue the necessary authorization.

From which it may be seen that even in the case of declarations in
regard to the right of fishery which are concrete, clear and definite,
there is needed, for the free exercise of the same, something more
than a declaration in general terms, such as is that contained in
the Sulu Protocol of 1877.

Furthermore, it is always customary in international agreements which
refer to fishery rights to lay down regulations and provisions which
shall regulate the exercise of such rights, as is proved by a multitude
of agreements, among which are: that already cited of Morocco, that of
February 18th, 1886, between Spain and France regarding the fishery
and navigation of the Bidasoa, in which the right of oyster fishing
is restricted, its absolute prohibition being made possible; as also
that of 1889 ratifying the preceding one, the Portuguese convention
of March 27th of 1893 and the coast police and fishery regulations;
as well as that of August 22nd of 1894, in regard to the fisheries
in the waters of the Algarbes, etc.; all of which is well known by
the illustrious Government of His Majesty, and attention is called
to it here only in support of the opinion maintained, namely, that
the right to authorize, condition, restrict, and even prohibit the
engagement in fishery on its coast and in its jurisdictional waters
is inherent in the sovereignty of an independent state; and if it has
this right in regard to fisheries in general, with greater reason must
it preserve and exercise the same in regard to oyster fisheries, by
reason of the changes which may be produced in the sea bed, and even
for the purpose of preserving the breeding grounds of the precious
pearl-shell mollusk, the Avicula Margaritifera, the banks being the
property of the nation, and like all its territory, inalienable and
non-prescriptible; both so that they shall not be exhausted and that
their exploitation may be reserved for the national industry.

From the preceding, written with less detail than would have been the
case had the pressure of time permitted, it may easily be inferred
that, in the opinion of this General Government, Spain in spite of
Declaration I of the Sulu Protocol--perhaps it would be more correct
to say, by virtue of that very declaration, the terms of which
really determine the meaning of Declaration III and Article I of the
Treaty--preserves intact her right as a sovereign nation to restrict,
condition, and even prohibit engagement in the oyster fishery on her
coasts and in her jurisdictional waters, without further limitations
than those which she may deem expedient to self-impose.

Admitting her rights as a sovereign state, there arises a question of
a political nature, which the circumstances above indicated convert
into a problem demanding an early resolution.

To what extent should Spain exercise this right?

On this point, the views of the General Government will be expressed
as concisely as possible and with the soberness demanded both by the
respect due to the high prerogatives of the public authorities and by
an ignorance of many of the elements which enter into the question,
without a knowledge of which it is difficult to determine to what
extent it is expedient to restrict the exercise of the right to engage
in the oyster fisheries which foreign subjects claim to exercise freely
in the Sulu archipelago, a pretension which this General Government
regards as entirely opposed to the rights of Spain and her moral and
material interests in the Far East. Our prestige with the Malay races
here, our moral influence over these semi-civilized Mohammedan people,
who recognize no right or supremacy but that of might, demand that
Spain, as a colonizing nation, shall maintain the integrity of her
sovereignty and shall not seem to be subjugated to the will of other
Powers, as would appear if, in her territories and on her coasts,
with the knowledge and permission of her authorities and of her war
ships, and without even heeding them, foreigners should perform acts
which, like that of engaging in the mother-of-pearl fishery, being
contrary to our material interests, cannot be carried out without
paying tribute to the Moro sultans and chieftains themselves.

There is no doubt that the need for preserving cordial relations with
Germany and England and for maintaining the most perfect understanding
between the European powers in anticipation of some concerted action
in regard to the Empires of China and of Japan, which will render
necessary in the future the expansive policy of the latter towards
the south, as well as the hegemony claimed by the latter in the
Orient, counsel a circumspect international policy and a moderate
exercise of our sovereign rights in the archipelago of Sulu; and for
this reason, perhaps it would be inexpedient to forbid the right of
fishery to foreign subjects, as such action would certainly give rise
to diplomatic questions and remonstrances, which should be avoided
at any cost; but this General Government deems it indispensable to
condition and regulate the exercise of this fishery right, especially
in so far as it relates to the pearl-producing oyster, the exploitation
of which should be governed by considerations of our prestige and
of the advantage and benefit of our material interests. Supported
therefore by our right of sovereignty, by international practice,
and by the terms of Declarations I and III of the Protocol of 1877 and
of Articles I and IV of that of 1885, there should be issued certain
coast police and fishery regulations for the Sulu archipelago, laying
down clearly the relations which are to exist between the Spanish
Government and foreign subjects engaging in the fishery industries
along our coasts and in our jurisdictional waters; which industries
should not be engaged in, especially in the case of the oyster,
without the necessary authorization of the Spanish authorities, and
after the payment of the corresponding industrial patent or license,
or of the dues which it may be deemed expedient to exact.

Much more might be said in regard to this important question,
as unexpectedly presented as it is urgent of resolution, given
the conditions created by the claim of the British subject
Mr. H. W. Dalton; and this General Government appreciates fully
the deficiency of its suggestions, which will be advantageously
supplemented by the great wisdom of his Majesty's Government, its
exalted patriotism, and the solicitous care that it gives to everything
touching the high interests of the nation, by which elevated sentiments
they are inspired.


APPENDIX XXIII

ROYAL DIRECTIONS RELATIVE TO THE TREATMENT OF FOREIGNERS ENGAGED IN
PEARL FISHING IN THE SULU WATERS, MARCH 23, 1896 [302]


Colonial Office

Excellent Sir: Examined by this office of the government the papers
transmitted by your Excellency with the official communication
No. 1967, of September 16th last, in the question raised by the
politico-military governor of Sulu, by reason of a communication
addressed to the same by the office of the commander-general of
the naval station at Manila, directing the prohibition of the
mother-of-pearl fishery in the waters of Sulu and the Carolines;
studied also the report of the General Government, and that of the
council of administration of the Philippines, and heard also the
illustrious opinion of the Department of State, to secure which the
papers were sent there, accompanied by the Royal order of the 7th of
January last; bearing in mind that our prestige among the natives in
those islands would perforce suffer seriously if foreigners were to
perform, without any intervention on the part of our authorities, acts,
which, like that of engaging in the mother-of-pearl shell fishery,
they cannot carry on without paying tribute to the Moro Sultans and
chieftains; though it is not less true that the absolute prohibition of
the right of fishery to foreigners would arouse, as wisely foreseen by
your Excellency, diplomatic remonstrances based upon the Protocol of
Sulu of March 7th, 1886; his Majesty the King (whom God protect), the
Queen Regent of the Kingdom acting in his name, has seen fit to direct
that your Excellency be informed that he has seen with pleasure the
tact and prudence with which this question has been dealt with, in the
first place by your Excellency, and afterwards by all the authorities
who have intervened in the same; that so long as the representative of
the English Pearling and Trading Company, the captains of their boats,
or other foreigners, do not urge with importunity the right to carry
on the industry of the mother-of-pearl shell fishery within the zone of
jurisdictional waters and at occupied places, an endeavor must be made
to prevent their doing so, in order, if possible, to set a precedent
favorable to our interests; and that in the event of their insisting,
it will be necessary to permit them to engage in the industry of the
mother-of-pearl fishery, with the obligation to submit in so doing to
the rules and regulations now in force or which may be put into force
hereafter. It is also the wish of his Majesty that your Excellency be
apprised of the expediency of formulating, with the greatest possible
despatch, coast police and fishery regulations for the archipelagoes
of Sulu and the Carolines; in which regulations care must be taken not
to make special mention of the Protocols, nor to recognize expressly
the rights of foreigners, and, on the other hand, not to depart from
the terms of the provisions of these international agreements, so
that in the event of any foreigners claiming the right in question,
they shall not be able to elude compliance with the regulations by
basing their pretensions on the terms of the said Protocols; for all
of which your Excellency will place yourself in harmony with the
competent authorities whose duty it is to take cognizance of this
matter, submitting afterwards for the approbation of this office
drafts of the coast police and fishery regulations above referred to.

By Royal order I communicate the above to you for proper action.

God protect your Excellency many years.


Madrid, March 23rd, 1896.

Tomas Castellano: rubricated.

To the Honorable the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands.


APPENDIX XXIV

LA TORRE'S VIEWS ON THE POLICY THAT SHOULD BE ADOPTED IN MINDANAO
AND SULU, JANUARY 11, 1893 [303]


Office of the Governor-General of the Philippines

A seal with the inscription: "Office of the Captain-General of the
Philippines. Headquarters."

Excellent Sir: At all times the condition of the unsubdued regions
of the island of Mindanao and, in general, of the whole archipelago,
has occupied the close attention of the Governors-General of these
Islands, and they have studied, according to their respective views,
the best methods for the complete subjection of the same.

For my part, I have meditated deeply upon every thing relating
to this important matter, and judging both from past experience
and from observations that I have been able to make personally,
as I apprised your Excellency after my return from a visit to the
aforementioned island on May 29th last, I believe it is evident
that the adoption of the same system for the subjection of different
races will not be productive of good results. In the island of Luzon,
a properly understood policy of conciliation, accompanied by slight
displays of force, will be successful in conciliating and subduing
the people sooner or later; for it may be observed at once that here
there does not exist that great racial antagonism which nearly always
makes compromise impossible. Such a policy, linked with prudence and
particularly with justice on the part of the delegates of authority,
will always be productive of great results, aside from the fact that
there are here many villages whose inhabitants are not warlike, but,
on the contrary, are docile, and await only some slight indication on
our part to regard us as protectors and allies against their enemies.

Much has already been done in this direction, as is shown by the many
politico-military provinces existing in this island; but we should
not stop in this island of progress; and in order to carry forward
and consummate the complete subjugation of the extensive districts not
yet subdued, troops must be detailed,--not in very large numbers, but
still in numbers sufficiently large to affect appreciably the service,
equally necessary in other regions of the archipelago. This is one
of the reasons which make requisite an increase in the army force
stationed here; further, if the number of the comandancias [304]
is to be increased, it is obvious that, in order to garrison them,
more troops are needed.

I have pointed out the need there is for employing different methods
for the subjection of the different races; and in fact, in regard
to the races inhabiting Mindanao, I believe that it is obvious and
unquestionable that favorable results will never be secured without
employing methods other than those of attraction.

The Moro race is completely antithetic to the Spanish, whether the
latter be peninsular or indigenous, and will ever be our eternal enemy.

The past proves clearly that those ostensible and ephemeral
submissions, apparently guaranteed by oaths and agreements, do not
bind the Moros in the slightest degree; for, knowing nothing of the
first principles of good-faith and loyalty, they do not hesitate
to break their promises whenever a favorable opportunity offers and
they think it possible to defeat our troops. They make a pretense of
being trusting and attentive even to our smallest suggestions, but
they are always watching for a good chance to open up hostilities,
and will resort to treason and cunning.

For these reasons it is well that they should know that we are the
stronger; that our friendship suits their interests because we are
backed by force--which is the only argument they can understand;
that their friendship is of no moment to us; and that the instant
they antagonize us, they will be promptly and severely punished.

Having taken up this point of view, the policy that we should adopt
may be inferred.

It is not necessary to undertake operations on a large scale, or to
open what might be termed a regular campaign, as has been done every
two or three years in the past; but, with our troops established at
a number of fortified places, it may be seen at once from what has
been said above, that we ought to maintain them there at any cost,
and that, abandoning an attitude entirely passive, we should advance
little by little in our conquest, always establishing ourselves
firmly on the territory conquered. In this way we shall, step by
step, bring under our dominion a large area of territory, at the same
time extending our sphere of influence towards the interior. Given
the conditions above described, it will be understood at once how
much we should lose in importance in the eyes of such an enemy if,
in response to their frequent attacks, we confined ourselves entirely
to a defensive policy, for they would interpret such an attitude as
an indication of weakness; consequently it is impossible for us to
maintain an attitude of inactivity: rather, taking advantage of the
treacherous conduct of the enemy, we should castigate them by means
of rapid and unexpected excursions lasting a few days, and for this
purpose it is indispensable that small columns of troops be stationed
at two or three well chosen points.

That the Moros are not disposed to be our friends is evident: and
while frequent examples in the history of these islands, in addition
to what has been said above, are sufficient to prove this assertion,
it is further corroborated by the many despatches I have addressed to
your Excellency, apprising you of the attacks made by the Moros upon
our troops and especially of the incidents which have taken place
during the last months of the year 1892. These I will recapitulate
succinctly, as they show that, far from breaking the rebels, the
events have only increased their strength.

On the morning of October 28th, while a reconnaissance was being made
at the post of Baras, the detachment making the same was attacked
by some fifty or sixty Moros, who were awaiting them in ambush. The
latter were, however, repulsed, and our troops being reënforced by a
detachment from the fort, the enemy fled, leaving five dead on the
field, besides two spears, three krises, three kampilan, and two
daggers, the losses on our side being one dead and five wounded.

On the morning of November 9th, again at the time of making a
reconnaissance, at the post of Malabang, our men were attacked by
some sixty Moros, who, being repulsed, fled, leaving six dead on the
field--three others dying later, according to reports received--besides
four kampilan, three krises, one tabas, one lance, and four daggers;
the losses of our side being one soldier killed and six wounded.

These two posts being afterwards visited by the military commander
of Illana Bay and the politico-military governor of Mindanao, by
reason of reports having been received that some thousand Moros had
banded together for the purpose of attacking these two places, they
informed me that excellent discipline prevailed among the troops of
the said garrisons, and that the Moros must have beaten a retreat,
since they had not been seen in that country.

On my part I have directed that the greatest possible vigilance,
care, and watchfulness be exercised at all the posts, never losing
sight of the fact that they are always in the presence of the enemy,
as is proved by the frequency with which they have been attacked. I
have ordered, further, that, when making reconnaissances or upon any
other occasion when it is necessary to separate a detachment from the
main body, the greatest number of soldiers that the circumstances
permit be employed, so as to prevent a surprise or ambuscade,
which aside from the direct loss that it entails, might have the
effect of demoralizing the troops, and so of increasing the boldness
and temerity of the enemy; I have given special instructions, too,
that the officers display in the field the greatest possible energy,
so as to keep up the spirits and confidence of the men.

In the northern portion of Mindanao, between Iligan and Mumungan the
Moros have also been active in making attacks, and although beaten
in every case, thanks to the good discipline prevailing among the
men and the judgment shown by the officers, who inspire the former
with confidence and afford them a good example at all times, they
still hope to have better luck in their future raids, as is proved
by the despatches received from the politico-military commander of
Mumungan. These despatches show that our soldiers no longer fear the
Moro race, nor even the Juramentados; and that our men always await the
attack of the enemy with great calmness and bravery, as is shown by
the accounts of the frequent ambuscades laid and surprises attempted
by the Moros. Already at the beginning of 1892 the attitude of the
sultans and datus in the neighborhood of Mumungan was so questionable
that Captain Abad, then commander of the fort there, having attempted
to go up the river Agus, accompanied by only one officer and four
men--thus in the guise of absolute peace--Datu Ala, of Balud, who
is now our friend, stopped him when he approached his territory,
telling him that although he wished to live at peace with us, he
could not allow him to advance further, nor any part of our troops
to do so. In spite of this, two months after this incident, General
Castilla, following closely my instructions, and taking advantage of
the circumstance foreseen by me--that upon his arrival at Mumungan he
was visited by the neighboring datus and sultans, including the Sultan
of Pantar, he announced to the latter, acting under instructions from
me, his intention of returning the friendly visit. Leaving Mumungan
early, in spite of a continuous heavy rain storm, he reached Pantar
at about eleven in the morning without making any stop, accompanied
by Ala and another datu, and while he was holding an affectionate
interview with the Sultan of Pantar and the troops were resting,
the captain of engineers, Navarro, made a clandestine inspection of
the ground and took a rough sketch of the best site for the future
fort, close to a bridge that can be built across the river Agus,
with a turret or rough defensive fortification on the opposite bank;
this done, General Castilla returned that same afternoon to Mumungan,
which he reached before night, without having fired a shot, in spite of
the predictions of the datus that he might easily meet with resistance
on the road.

Later, all the datus living in the region lying between Pantar and
Iligan reiterated to me, personally, in May last, at Mumungan, and
later to the military commander, their protestations of adhesion to
Spain. Afterwards there came the visit that a goodly number of datus,
among them the Datu of Pantar, made me in Manila, where they remained
and were entertained during fifteen days; and with the consistent
approval of these, the road from Iligan to Mumungan was built, in
consequence of which work the weekly attendance of Moros at the market
of Iligan increased, and the Datu of Bukamar and another from Marawi
presented themselves in that place. Thither also the Datu Amay-Pakpak,
now an old man, promised to send his son. The concurrence of Moros
at that place was further increased by the assistance that was given
to a wounded Moro; until, at last, a solemn oath of allegiance was
secured, being taken, in the presence of the aforementioned military
commander, by a great number of datus and sultans, in accordance with
their ritual.

On November 8th, the military commander of Mumungan, under the pretext
of a wedding to which the Datu of Pantar had invited him and which he
attended, made an inspection of the country in the neighborhood of
the said rancheria [305] of Pantar, lying to the south of Mumungan,
and had an opportunity of seeing that, in conformity with the reports
I had received, Pantar possessed advantageous conditions for the
establishment there of another advance fort, the construction of
which could be commenced upon the continuation and completion up
to that point of the new road built from Iligan to Mumungan. But in
spite of the good intentions of the military commander not to break
into hostilities except in the last resort, in accordance with the
positive instructions I had given him, he was unable to prevent his
troops being attacked upon the return journey, and therefore they
opened fire upon the enemy; which proves once again the difficulty of
following the path of conciliation and attraction with an enemy who
pays absolutely no heed to reason; in spite of the fact that with
this method there had been joined that of warning the neighboring
Moros who profess to be so friendly, that the only genuine proof of
adhesion to which I should give credit would be that of the moral
and collective support of all of them against any act of aggression
within their territory committed by Moros from other rancherias,
whether in large or in small numbers.

On November 25th I was informed by the same military commander that,
while the convoy was transferring supplies from Mumungan to Iligan,
there appeared a juramentado, who attempted to wound a soldier; but
the latter, waiting for him with great calmness, defended himself
valiantly, and the Moro was despatched with the assistance of some
other soldiers who came upon the scene.

On the 10th of December I was informed that a detachment of the troops
stationed at Mumungan, while on its way to the market of Iligan was
attacked by a body of fourteen juramentados who, however, were repulsed
with a loss of two killed, while, on our side, one man was lost.

At Baras, also, while making the reconnaissance on December 10th there
appeared a band of Moros in an attitude of hostility; but they were
compelled to retire at the first volley from our troops. Nevertheless,
two juramentados separated themselves from the main body and attacked
an equal number of our men; the latter awaited them firmly and killed
them with bayonet thrusts. Another Moro was also slain while attempting
a precipitate flight. Recently, on the 15th of December, the military
commander of Mumungan, hearing of the intentions of the enemy, which
were far from peaceable, determined, in order to guard against all
contingencies, to continue the extension of the road and to complete
and close the palisade around the new inclosure at the fort, made so
as to accommodate the increased number of troops. For the first of
these two purposes, he left the fort at half past five in the morning,
well-armed and ready to punish the Moros if they presented themselves,
setting out with one hundred and fifty men of the 73rd regiment and
sixteen convicts, besides a corporal and eight persons of the 73rd
in charge of a company of engineers, another company of the 73rd and
sixty convicts, who marched without arms and equipped for work.

At ten o'clock in the morning the advance guard reached the entrance to
the wood, and as the intention was to collect lumber that had already
been cut and dragged to the road, the troops advanced. At this moment
there appeared in the middle of the road some eight hundred Moros
brandishing their arms and uttering war-cries, who immediately retired
to some defensive works which they had constructed out of the very
logs above referred to. In view of this, our troops continued their
march, opening fire at about one hundred yards from the defensive
works of the enemy, and in a little while, captured the same, routing
the defenders, as well as some more of the enemy who appeared on the
two flanks of the column, causing some eighty deaths; on our side we
had one killed and two wounded convicts. After this incident, the said
military commander made his way to Iligan without suffering any attack,
in spite of the fact that the Moros had constructed other defensive
works on the road, which latter were destroyed without any casualties.

The conduct of the troops on this march was brilliant, and I wish to
recommend to the consideration of your Excellency those who especially
distinguished themselves; but I have again directed the military
commander of Mumungan to avoid as far as possible all necessity for
fresh combats, extending, but without any compromise of dignity,
the policy of conciliation which I have so strongly recommended to him.

From all the above your Excellency will understand with how much
foresight I requested from the Government of his Majesty, on the
24th of April last, permission to place on a war footing as many of
the seven regiments which make up the infantry in these Islands as
had not yet been placed on this footing, setting forth the estimated
cost of the same in the plans which I sent for approval, and if the
increase was necessary then, it is evident that at the present time
it is much more necessary; for, as your Excellency will see from what
I have communicated to you in this extensive document, the condition
of the Moros, justifying the predictions made by me at that time,
has become steadily more hostile as they never rest nor miss any
opportunity of causing us the greatest possible harm, endeavoring
to obstruct all the work we plan to carry out for the improvement
of the means of communication between our present possessions; and
while it is true that they are not successful in their attempts,
still we must put a stop to their increasing audacity.

I take the liberty again to call the attention of your Excellency to
the absolute necessity of placing on a war footing the three regiments
now on a footing of peace, in accordance with the permission already
granted by the Department--without waiting until next July. In this
way, without undertaking a regular campaign, as I have already stated,
and without expense to the Government, it will be possible to improve
the present condition of things, which is gradually becoming somewhat
discreditable to the honor of the flag. I do not doubt that your
Excellency will so understand it, and I thank you in advance, in
the name of this suffering army, for the immediate concession of the
credit necessary for the reënforcement above mentioned. God protect
your Excellency many years.


Manila, January 11th, 1893.


Most Excellent Sir:--Eulogio Despojol.--Followed by a rubric. The most
Excellent the Minister of War.--A copy.--The Acting Colonel in Command
of Headquarters.--Pedro de Bascaran.--A seal with the inscription:
"Office of the Captain-General of the Philippines.--Headquarters."

A copy.--Luis de la Torre: rubricated.


NOTES

[1] See Ethnological Survey Publications, Vol. IV, Pt. I, p. 11.

[2] The spelling of proper names used throughout this paper is that
adopted by the author and differs in some respects from that in use
in the Division of Ethnology.--Editor.

[3] This settlement is on a small adjacent island of the same name.

[4] An officer next below a datu in rank.

[5] An officer next below a panglima in rank.

[6] The word Tumangtangis means "Shedder of tears." As the summit of
this mountain is the last object to be seen by sailors leaving the
island, they weep from homesickness when they lose sight of it.

[7] Quoted in Keppel's "Visit to the Indian Archipelago," p. 70.

[8] Some maps place this mountain near Tu'tu', but reliable Moros
apply the name to the mountain west of Si'it and nearer to Su' than
to Tu'tu'.

[9] Princess Ipil and her followers were wrecked and drowned at this
point. Their bodies are said to have turned into stone and formed the
rocks that line the shore. Some of the rocks seemed to the people to
resemble petrified human beings.

[10] Names of fruits with no English equivalents.

[11] A Philippine tree from the blossoms of which a perfume is made.

[12] Spanish word for street.

[13] Beach at the head of the bay.

[14] A sultanate in northern Borneo.

[15] The Mindanao Herald, July 21, 1906.

[16] Gum copal.

[17] Most of these are females.

[18] See below, p. 148.

[19] The eleventh month of the Mohammedan year.

[20] Sulu; the head, the chief.

[21] Arabic; the slave of the Merciful.

[22] Malay; sir or mister.

[23] Arabic; leader, caliph, high priest.

[24] A Sulu form of the Arabic "Caliph."

[25] Malay-Sanskrit; minister of state.

[26] The central high region of Sumatra.

[27] Malay; officer of state. It literally means "rich man."

[28] Sanskrit; king.

[29] Malay-Sanskrit; emperor or caliph. It is here used as a proper
noun.

[30] A place in Lati, Sulu.

[31] Sulu; chicken, fowl.

[32] Sulu-Malay; slave.

[33] Sanskrit; wise.

[34] Arabic; understanding, mind.

[35] Malay-Sanskrit; subordinate officer of state.

[36] Arabic; lady, grandmother.

[37] Arabic; safe and sound.

[38] Malay; lady, woman.

[39] Arabic; righteous.

[40] A title of nobility.

[41] Arabic, Fatimah; the name of the Prophet's daughter.

[42] Arabic; brilliant.

[43] Arabic; wife or husband.

[44] Arabic; beautiful.

[45] Arabic; hoping.

[46] Arabic; faithful.

[47] Arabic; religion.

[48] Arabic; trusted or trustworthy.

[49] Arabic; guide, leader.

[50] Sulu; fruit.

[51] Arabic; intelligent.

[52] Arabic; feminine of "salim" or safe and sound.

[53] Arabic; sleeping.

[54] Arabic; known.

[55] Arabic; noble, subordinate officer of state.

[56] Sanskrit; Iddha, kindled, lighted, or sunshine.

[57] Sanskrit; Indra, the god of the heavens, or most likely Indira,
name of Lakshmi, the wife of Vishnu.

[58] Sulu; light, sun.

[59] Arabic; wise.

[60] The name of Mohammed's wife.

[61] Arabic; everlasting, eternal.

[62] Arabic; perfection.

[63] Arabic; scribe.

[64] Arabic; educated, taught.

[65] Arabic; virtuous.

[66] Arabic; pride, glory.

[67] Arabic; father.

[68] Arabic; firm, resolute, an attribute of God.

[69] Arabic; Mary.

[70] The Baklaya party should have been mentioned after the Tagimaha,
but it was evidently left out by mistake. Tagimaha is a Sanskrit word
which means country.

[71] Arabic; generous, noble.

[72] Arabic; served, master.

[73] Arabic; noble, applied to a descendant of Mohammed.

[74] Sulu, anchorage. The settlement lies 3 miles west of Jolo.

[75] It is used here as a name. As a title it is higher than raja
and is equivalent to sultan or emperor.

[76] The Moro word for Zamboanga.

[77] Arabic; night, a common name.

[78] Arabic; power, superior authority, sultan.

[79] Arabic; glory.

[80] A corrupt form of the Arabic Ahmad.

[81] From the Arabic "Sheikh," meaning chief.

[82] A place in Sumatra (?)

[83] Java.

[84] Arabic; master or noble, addressed to descendants of the prophet
Mohammed.

[85] Town and state in southeastern Sumatra.

[86] Arabic; noble. This word is often pronounced by the Moros as
"salip" or "sarip."

[87] Arabic; height.

[88] Sanskrit; princess.

[89] Sanskrit; greater king, emperor.

[90] In Malay it indicates rank or office; in Sulu it is used only
as a name.

[91] Malay; young.

[92] Arabic; defender.

[93] Arabic; honor, respect.

[94] Arabic; star, meteor, bright flame.

[95] Arabic; chosen (by God).

[96] Arabic; interceder.

[97] Arabic; victory.

[98] From the Arabic `azeem or great; not from `Alim, meaning learned.

[99] Arabic; exalter or defender.

[100] Arabic; Israel.

[101] Arabic; honor.

[102] Arabic; orator; the pandita who reads the oration, a part of
the religions services held on Friday.

[103] See Ethnological Survey Publications, Vol. IV, pt. 1, p. 64.

[104] The servant of the giver.

[105] Jamiyun is Sanskrit and means brother or sister's son; Kulisa
is Indra's thunderbolt.

[106] One of the names of the wife of Vishnu.

[107] Sulu; the sun.

[108] The Sulus believed that Alexander the Great came to Sulu and
that their ancient rulers were descended from him.

[109] Sanskrit; the plant. Jamiyun Kulisa, Indira Suga, and Masha'ika
are the names of the ancient gods of Sulu. Prior to Islam the Sulus
worshiped the Vedic gods and evidently believed them to be the
forefathers or creators of men. The Sulu author was ignorant of this
fact and used the names of the gods as names of real men.

[110] Arabic; faithful.

[111] Chief.

[112] A gong used for signals and in worship.

[113] Western district of the Island of Sulu.

[114] The northern and central district of the Island of Sulu.

[115] The southern and central part of the Island of Sulu.

[116] The eastern part of the Island of Sulu.

[117] The town where the present Sultan of Sulu resides.

[118] The inhabitants of the region west of the town of Jolo.

[119] The inhabitants of the northern coast, east of Jolo.

[120] Arabic; generous.

[121] Arabic; master or served.

[122] Arabic; noble; a title applied to a descendant of Mohammed.

[123] Arabic; plural of wali, a man of God.

[124] Sulu; anchorage; the ancient capital of Sulu.

[125] A district in Sumatra.

[126] Arabic; beauty.

[127] Arabic; plural of karim, meaning generous.

[128] Arabic; orator; a high religious title, allied to Imam.

[129] Arabic; slave or servant.

[130] Arabic; the Giver, referring to God.

[131] See p. 152.

[132] Genealogies; see Vol. IV, pt. 1, p. 11, Ethnological Survey
Publications.

[133] Sanskrit; sunshine.

[134] Natives of the Celebes; they were often called by the Spaniards
Macassars.

[135] Timway or tumuway, meaning "leader" or "chief," is the title
given to the chiefs of the land before Islam. Timway has been replaced
by datu.

[136] It is possible that this color distinction arose from an early
superstition or belief of Hindu origin assigning those divisions of
the island to the four respective Hindu deities, who are generally
represented by those four colors.

[137] Quoted in Keppel's "Visit to the Indian Archipelago," p. 127.

[138] This term is applied in Sulu in the same sense as the Malay
terms Orang-banua and Orang-bukit, meaning hill tribes or aborigines,
or, as they say in Mindanao, Manubus.

[139] This term is used here in the same sense as Orang-Malayu meaning
the better or seacoast Malays.

[140] The determination of this date and that of the rule of Abu
Bakr is covered by a complete statement which will appear in the
chapter on the early Mohammedan missionaries in Sulu and Mindanao,
to be published in a later paper.

[141] The first historic seat of Malay rule was Pagar Ruyong (in
the mountains of Sumatra), the capital of the so-called "Empire of
Menangkabaw." (Malay-English Dictionary, R. J. Wilkinson, III, 2.)

[142] Brass cannon used by Moros.

[143] Variety of mango.

[144] The prince of the princes.

[145] The exalter of the humble.

[146] The defender of the faith; the first.

[147] Malay word, meaning "in the mountain."

[148] The Sulu equivalent of "Digunung."

[149] The kind.

[150] "The Philippine Islands," Blair and Robertson, Vol. IV, p. 174.

[151] Bisayas.

[152] Natives of the Philippine Islands.

[153] Large estates assigned to Spaniards.

[154] An honorific title given to the early governors of the
Philippines.

[155] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson II, pp. 98, 99.

[156] Ibid., II, p. 156.

[157] Ibid., VII, p. 68, 69.

[158] So given in the text without explanation. It is probably
a weight.

[159] The Philippine Islands, VIII, pp. 73-75.

[160] Apuntes sobre Jolo, Espina, p. 56.

[161] A large canoe used by the Malayan peoples with two rows of oars,
very light, and fitted with a European sail; its rigging of native
manufacture. (Philippine Islands, II, p. 246.)

[162] Large Moro boat with outriggers.

[163] Bungsu, the sultan; sire and intermediator.

[164] Name of boat used in the Philippine Islands.

[165] Rizal conjectures that this word is a transformation of the
Tagál word, lampitaw, a small boat still used in the Philippines.

[166] We follow Stanley's translation. He derives the word cacatal
(zacatal) from zacatc, or sacate, signifying "reed," "hay," or other
similar growths, zacatal thus being a "place of reeds" or a "thicket."

[167] A long weapon resembling a sword, used by Moros.

[168] From kalasag, a shield. (Rizal.)

[169] Argensola says that this native, named Ubal, had made a
feast two days before, at which he had promised to kill the Spanish
commander. (Rizal.)

[170] Posts set upright in the ground.

[171] Sucesos de Is Islas Filipinas, Dr. Antonio de Morga, Mexico,
1609; The Philippine Islands, XV, pp. 90-92.

[172] See Appendixes I and II, Pacification of Mindanao.

[173] Fathoms.

[174] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson IX, pp. 283, 285-287.

[175] Ibid., IX, pp. 289, 290.

[176] See Appendix III, Moro Raids of 1599 and 1600.

[177] History of the Philippines, Barrows, pp. 153, 154.

[178] See Appendix IV, Gallinato's expedition to Jolo.

[179] See Appendix V, Olaso's expedition.

[180] The greatest Sultan of Mindanao, the son of Bwisan.

[181] An account of this fight and the Moro expedition under Tagal
is given in "The Philippine Islands," Blair and Robertson XXVII,
pp. 215-226.

[182] See "Letter from Corcuera to Philip IV." (The Philippine Islands,
XXVII, pp. 346-359.)

[183] See Appendix VI, Corcuera's campaign in Jolo.

[184] On Moro pirates and their raids in the seventeenth century,
see The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XLI, pp. 277-324.

[185] A Spanish measure of weight used in the Philippine Islands,
equivalent to about 133 pounds.

[186] The defender of the Faith.

[187] Relación de a entrada del Sultan Rey de Joló, in Archivo del
Bibliófilo Filipino, Vol. I.

[188] History of the Philippines, Barrows, p. 227.

[189] See Appendix VII, Obando's report on the preparations to be
undertaken to return Alimud Din to Sulu; also Appendix VIII, Obando's
report on the circumstances attending the attempt to return Alimud
Din to Sulu.

[190] The Philippine Islands, Foreman, pp. 145, 146.

[191] The sultan complained that he had not been treated in Manila
with dignity equal to his rank and quality, and that he had constantly
been under guard of soldiers in his residence (this was explained to
be a guard of honor).

[192] The Philippine Islands, Foreman, p. 147.

[193] On the occupation of Palawan and Balabak, see Appendixes IX
and X.

[194] History of the Philippines, Barrows, p. 228.

[195] See Appendix XI.

[196] See Forrest's "A Voyage to New Guinea," pp. 320-335.

[197] Another name for Jolo and the name of the stream which passes
through it.

[198] It is more likely that elephants were obtained from Borneo
and Sumatra.

[199] Some were more than 90 feet in length.

[200] One of the settlements forming the town of Kotabato.

[201] This was an erroneous impression. It no doubt seemed so to
Captain Forrest who judged from his observations of Sultan Israel
who acquired a taste for European music in Manila.

[202] A Voyage to New Guinea, Capt. Thomas Forrest, pp. 336-337.

[203] Name given to the network of channels by which the waters of
the Pasig River find their way to the sea.

[204] History of the Philippines, Barrows, pp. 246-248.

[205] See Appendixes XII, XIII, XIV, and XV.

[206] A variety of palm from which mats and sails are made.

[207] Edition of 1853, pp. 57-69.

[208] A leaf chewed with betel nut.

[209] Amirul Mu'minin or Alimud Din I.

[210] See Appendixes XVI and XVII.

[211] A visit to the Indian Archipelago, p. 58.

[212] A big dugout canoe.

[213] Vessels of some 11 meters length, 1 1/2 meters beam, and 40
centimeters overhang at the bow. They are furnished with outriggers
and a removable deck [commonly of loose slats]. (Note in Montero y
Vidal's History of the Piracy of the Mohammedan Malays.)

[214] The Spanish word for conquest transliterated. The word can not
be understood by the Sulus.

[215] Datu Daniel.

[216] Spanish. Como reconocimiento de dominio (i.e., of Spain). The
idea is that the settler acknowledges that he does not own the land
in fee simple, but holds it as a tenant of the state.

[217] A police force maintained in the Philippines during Spanish
times.

[218] Troops made up of men deported from other parts of the Islands.

[219] A large knife used by Moros in fighting.

[220] Men who have taken an oath to kill non-Mohammedans.

[221] Moro cannon.

[222] About 5 cents, United States currency.

[223] See Appendix XVIII, on regulations relative to taxes and
imports on natives and immigrants in Sulu; also Appendix XIX, on the
protocol of Sulu of 1877 between Spain, Germany, and Great Britain;
Appendix XX, on the protocol of Sulu of 1885 between Spain, Germany,
and Great Britain; Appendix XXI, decree of the General Government
in regard to payment of tribute of Sulus; Appendixes XXII and XXIII,
on rights of foreigners engaged in pearl fishing in Sulu waters.

[224] A chief subordinate to a datu.

[225] See Appendix XXIV, on La Torre's views on the policy that should
be adopted in Mindanao and Sulu.

[226] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XV, pp. 93-100.

[227] A point and settlement on the north bank of the Mindanao River
and at its mouth.

[228] A careful review of Ronquillo's reports and letters on his
pacification of Mindanao shows an evident error in the use of the
word Bwayan to signify the settlement or stronghold of the Sultan
of Magindanao. Bwayan here, and probably in Figueroa's report, too,
is used in place of Magindanao, which lay on the site occupied at
present by Kotabato. Bwisan was then the Sultan of Magindanao and
headed the opposition to Ronquillo's advance up the north branch of
the Mindanao River. Sirungan, who is mentioned in this report, might
have been a datu or subdatu of Magindanao, not necessarily Sirungan,
the Raja of Bwayan.

[229] The correct name is Sirungan.

[230] Cachil or Kachil is a Malay word signifying "little" or "young,"
hence a youth of distinction or a younger prince of the royal line.

[231] A tributary of the Mindanao River which rises in Talayan,
and empties at Taviran.

[232] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XI, pp. 135-139.

[233] Unsigned.

[234] Point or bay, not an Island.

[235] Point or bay, not an island.

[236] The Strait of Sunda, which separates Java from Sumatra.

[237] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XV, pp. 190-196.

[238] This word is as commonly used with an "l" as with an "r,"
as Sirungan.

[239] A strong wind south by west.

[240] Shields.

[241] This was the first piratical expedition made against the
Spaniards by the inhabitants of the southern islands. (Rizal.)

Barrantes (Guerras Piraticas) wrongly dates the abandonment of La
Caldera and the incursion of the Moros 1590. Continuing, he says:
"The following year they repeated the expedition so that the Indians
retired to the densest parts of the forests, where it cost considerable
trouble to induce them to become quiet, for a woman, who proclaimed
herself a sibyl or prophetess, preached to them that they should not
obey the Spaniards any longer, for the latter had allied themselves
with the Moros to exterminate all the Pintados."

[242] Native word for mountain.

[243] Those to whom land had been granted with control over the
natives who worked on it.

[244] The Island of Gimarás, southeast of Panay, and separated from
it by the Strait of Iloilo.

[245] Probably gongs.

[246] Neither Stanley nor Rizal throws any light on this word. The
Spanish dictionaries likewise fail to explain it, as does also a
limited examination of Malay and Tagal dictionaries. Three conjectures
are open: 1. A derivative of tifatas, a species of mollusk, hence a
conch; 2. A Malay or Tagal word for either a wind or other instrument,
the Malay words for "to blow," "sound a musical instrument," being
tiyup and tiyupkan; 3. A misprint for the Spanish pifas, a possible
shortened form of pifanos, signifying fifes.

[247] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XV, pp. 240-244,
264-268.

[248] Sailing vessels.

[249] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XXIII, pp. 87, 88.

[250] Unsigned.

[251] A small vessel used as a tender to carry messages between
larger vessels.

[252] The Philippine Islands, Blair and Robertson, XXVIII, pp. 41-63.

[253] In the manuscript that we follow the letter of March 31 is
given second, while that of April 5 is given first; we have arranged
them chronologically.

[254] Garo: probably the same as garita; a fortified outpost.

[255] The translation of this passage seems to be, "If God fights
against a city, he who guards it watches in vain." The difficulty
lies in "a custodierit," which we translate as "fights against."

[256] A Spanish measure of length which is about equal to 1 yard,
English measure.

[257] The Gimbahans or Sulus of the interior mountains.

[258] Babui, in their language, signifies "pig"; apparently they
called the Spaniards "swine," as expressing the acme of contempt for
their besiegers.

[259] "Thanks be to God who has given us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ."

[260] Combés says (Hist. Mindanao, Reana's ed., column 264) that this
queen, named Tuan Baluka, was a native of Basilan, and that she had
acquired such ascendancy over her husband that the government of Sulu
was entirely in her hands. This statement explains the presence of
the Basilan men in the Sulu stronghold.

[261] Zamboanga, the correct spelling is Samboangan.

[262] Culverins of small bore.

[263] This letter is unsigned; but the transcript of it made by
Ventura del Arco places it with others ascribed to Barrios. See
detailed accounts of the expedition against Jolo (Sulu) in Combés's
Hist. Mindanao y Joló (Retana and Pastells ed.), cols. 349-368;
Diaz's Conquistas, pp. 388-401: Murillo Velarde's Hist. Philipinas,
fol. 92, 93; and La Concepcion's Hist. Philipinas, V, pp. 334-351.

[264] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[265] The Recoletos or barefoot Augustinian friars.

[266] Spanish expediente, the collection of all the papers referring
to a single subject.

[267] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[268] Maestre de Campo.

[269] The inhabitants of Koran, northeast Borneo, pagan pirates
subdued by Sulu in 1769.

[270] Official designation of the Audiencia when assembled in executive
session under the presidency of the Captain-General.

[271] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[272] Sp. forzados, men compelled to row in the galleys, usually as
punishment for crime.

[273] Manila. The shorter form of its title of "La siempre noble y
leal Ciudad."

[274] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[275] A small sailing vessel.

[276] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[277] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[278] The Honorable East India Company.

[279] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[280] I.e., of the Sulus.

[281] Sp. champanes.

[282] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[283] "En sus propios buques" (i.e., of Sulu).

[284] This and the following statements are not correct.

[285] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[286] Though inaccurate and biased, the ideas expressed in this report
represent the opinion and feelings of many Spanish officials who were
connected with Moro affairs.

[287] The correct name is Abu Bakr.

[288] Such a statement is unduly biased.

[289] A Spanish magistrate.

[290] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[291] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[292] Vessels up to 80 feet length by 18 or 20 beam, made of wood,
bamboo, nipah, and rattan. The Moros arm them by placing at the two
sides lantakas and falconets, mounted on iron swivels, and at the
bow and stern, cannon set in stout pieces of timber. The sails are
usually of matting made of saguran [a kind of palm-leaf], spread on
bamboo poles. (Note in Montero y Vidal's History of the Piracy of
the Mohammedan Malays.)

[293] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[294] Sp. Contaduría General.

[295] Personal registration fees.

[296] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[297] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[298] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[299] Settlements.

[300] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[301] The Gearling & Tradin (sic.).

[302] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[303] From the Division of Archives, Executive Bureau, Manila.

[304] A term used by the Spaniards to designate certain governmental
districts in the Philippines.

[305] Settlement.


End of Project Gutenberg's The History of Sulu, by Najeeb M. Saleeby