1380-1450

To this period belongs the Mohammedan invasion of the Archipelago. If
the Buranun [138] were Dayaks in origin, they certainly did not
keep their Dayak characteristics very long. For in all probability
Tuan Masha'ika, the Tagimahas, and the Baklayas were Malays [139]
who came into Sulu from the west, and the dynasty established by
Masha'ika must have exercised due influence on the Buranun. Whatever
religion or customs these Malay conquerors had in their original land,
they no doubt continued to practise in their new home. It does not
appear that the Samals produced any change in this respect, and the
same worship and social organization which the Sulus had remained
unchanged until the Mohammedans reached the Archipelago.

The two prominent characters who mark this era are Makdum and Raja
Baginda. Makdum was a noted Arabian judge or scholar who arrived at
Malacca about the middle of the fourteenth century, converted Sultan
Mohammed Shah, the ruler, to Islam and established this religion
throughout the state of Malacca. He evidently practised magic and
medicine and exerted an unusually strong influence on the people
of Malacca. Continuing farther east, he reached Sulu and Mindanao
about the year 1380. [140] In Sulu, it is said, he visited almost
every island of the Archipelago and made converts to Islam in many
places. The Island of Sibutu claims his grave, but the places at
which he was most successful are Bwansa, the old capital of Sulu,
and the Island of Tapul. It is said that the people of Bwansa built
a mosque for him, and some of the chiefs of the town accepted his
teachings and faith. The Tapul people claim descent from him, and
some of them still regard him as a prophet.

Makdum's success in preaching a new faith to people as independent
in their individual views and as pertinacious in their religious
practices, beliefs, and customs as the Sulus must have been in his
time, is certainly remarkable and creditable to a high degree. The
results of his mission to Malacca and Sulu throw a new light on the
history of Islam in the Philippine Islands and modify the opinion
formerly held relative to its introduction by the sword. How much of
a lasting effect the teachings of Makdum could have had on Sulu is
very difficult of estimation, but in all probability the new sapling
planted in the soil of Sulu would have withered before long had it
not been for the future current of events which watered it and reared
it to maturity.

Some time after Makdum (the Genealogy of Sulu says ten years)
there came into Sulu a prince from Menangkabaw called Raja
Baginda. Menangkabaw [141] is a rich, high region in central Sumatra,
from which many Malayan dynasties seem to have come. Raja was the usual
title applied to all Malayan kings. Baginda is said to have touched at
Sambuwangan (Zamboanga) and Basilan before reaching Sulu. The nature
of such a move can not be explained unless he followed the northern
route leading from Borneo to Kagayan Sulu, Pangutaran, and Zamboanga,
which route seems to have been taken by all Mohammedan missionaries
and invaders mentioned in the tarsila.

The written records of Baginda's arrival and his later history are
exceedingly brief. When he arrived at Bwansa, the Sulus came out to
engage him in battle, as we would naturally expect; but, the tarsila
continues, on learning that he was a Mohammedan, they desisted from
fighting, invited him to stay with them, and seem to have entertained
him very hospitably. Such an account is absurd on the face of it. Raja
Baginda was not a trader nor a traveler touring the Archipelago. He
was accompanied by ministers and no doubt came to Bwansa to stay
and rule. His coming was an ordinary kind of invasion, which proved
successful. When Abu Bakr reached Bwansa, as we will learn later, he
was directed to Raja Baginda, who must have been the supreme ruler
of Bwansa. Accordingly we find all the chiefs of Sulu enumerated
in the tarsila at the day of Baginda's arrival subordinate in rank,
having no "rajas" among them.

The Genealogy of Sulu is as misleading as the tarsila of Magindanao
in that it pictures the arrival of Baginda as peaceful as that
of Kabungsuwan. Some of the chiefs who were Mohammedans possibly
intrigued against their former overlords, and, joining Baginda's
forces, defeated their opponents; but the dearth of information
relative to this early Philippine history renders it impracticable to
secure any more light on the subject. It may not, however, be out of
place to remind the reader that the fourteenth century was marked by
unusual activity in methods of warfare. Gunpowder, which was known and
used as an explosive long before that date, had not been made use of in
throwing projectiles in battle. The Arabs, we know, used firearms early
in the fourteenth century, and we may conjecture that they introduced
such weapons into Malacca and other parts of Malaysia as they moved
east. It is not improbable then that a prince coming from Sumatra
was provided with firearms which overawed the ignorant inhabitants of
Bwansa and subdued the valor and courage of the Sulu and Samal pirates
of those days. The statement made in the tarsila of Magindanao that,
after the people of Slangan came down the river to where Kabungsuwan
was anchored, "He beckoned (or pointed his finger) to them, but one
of them died on that account, and they were frightened and returned,"
is the only kind of evidence found which can possibly be interpreted to
indicate that a firearm was used. Lacking confirmation as this may be,
yet we positively know that when the Spaniards reached these Islands,
these people had an abundance of firearms, muskets, lantaka [142]
and other cannon, and we may be justified in saying that probably
firearms existed in the land in the century preceding the arrival of
the Spaniards. This brings us approximately down to Baginda's days.

In considering the etymology of the titles of the Sulu chiefs mentioned
in the time of Baginda, we observe that they are of three classes. The
first class were the datus. These had mantiri or ministers and probably
represented the descendants of Raja Sipad and Tuan Masha'ika. The
second class were the sayk. "Sayk" is probably derived from the Arabic
"Sheikh" meaning "chief." These were the Tagimaha chiefs, and their
rank was evidently subordinate to that of datu. The third class were
the orangkaya, the Baklaya chiefs. These are also subordinate in
grade and could not have been higher than the sayk. The words datu
and orangkaya it must be remembered are of Malay origin, while raja
and baginda are Sanskrit, baginda being the highest and being often
used as equivalent to emperor, while raja means only king.

Jawa is the Malay term for Java. The incident related in the tarsila
relative to the gift of two elephants sent by the raja of Java to the
raja of Sulu is interesting, in that it explains the existence in Jolo
of the elephants found there during the earlier Spanish invasions. It
further indicates that Raja Baginda was not an insignificant chief
and that he kept up some kind of communication with the rajas of
western Malaysia.

The elephants received by Baginda were let loose, the story says,
and they lived and multiplied on Mount Tumangtangis. On the declivity
of this mountain there is a place still called lubluban-gaja, which
means the "habitat or lying-place of the elephant." The people relate
several stories which make mention of the elephant, one of which
declares that the chief who killed the last wild elephant was given
the hand of the sultan's daughter in marriage, in admiration of his
strength and bravery.


ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MOHAMMEDAN CHURCH IN SULU AND THE REIGN OF ABU
BAKR, 1450-1480

Brevity is without exception a marked characteristic of all Moro
writings. Their letters, unlike those of the Malays and Arabs, are
brief and devoid of compliment or detail.

It is very difficult to pick out a superfluous word or phrase from the
text of the Sulu tarsila. In fact, the narrative of events throughout
the manuscript is so curtailed as to be reduced to a mere synopsis of
headlines. It gives a very dim view of the general subject and leaves
out much that is desired. Thus, the whole question of establishing
Islam in Sulu and organizing its sultanate is dispensed with in one
short paragraph briefly enumerating the following facts: That Sayid
Abu Bakr came to Bwansa from Palembang by the way of Bruney; that he
lived with Raja Baginda and taught and established a new religion
for Sulu; that he was greatly respected by the people; and that he
married Paramisuli, the daughter of Baginda, and became sultan.

The traditions of the country, notwithstanding their brevity, add
some further but less reliable information. It is the common belief
that Abu Bakr was born in Mecca and that he lived some time at Juhur
(or Malacca). Others state that it was his father, Zaynul Abidin,
who came from Mecca and that Abu Bakr was born of the daughter of
the Sultan of Juhur at Malacca. He came to Pangutaran first, the
narrative continues, then to Zamboanga and Basilan. His younger
brother, who had accompanied him, continued eastward to Mindanao,
while he remained at Basilan for a short while. Having heard of Abu
Bakr, the people of Sulu sent Orangkaya Su'il to Basilan to invite
him to Bwansa to rule over them. This invitation was accepted and
Abu Bakr was inaugurated sultan over Sulu soon after his arrival there.

From the annals of Malacca we know that Abu Bakr was a famous authority
on law and religion and that his mission to Malaysia was prompted by
enthusiasm for the promulgation of the doctrines of Abu Ishaq, which
were embodied in a book entitled "Darul-Mazlum, or The House of the
Oppressed or Ignorant." After preaching these doctrines in Malacca with
success, he evidently proceeded farther east, stopping at Palembang
and Bruney and reaching Sulu about 1450. The hospitality with which
he was received at Bwansa points to success in his mission to a degree
that enabled him later to marry the Princess Paramisuli, the daughter
of Raja Baginda. He established mosques there and taught religion and
law; and the people and chiefs actually abandoned their former gods
and practiced the new religion and observed its commandments. This
process of reformation and conversion was no doubt slow and gradual,
but it was real and sure.

There is no evidence to show that Abu Bakr had any military forces
by virtue of which he could assume military authority and rule after
Baginda's death. But it is perfectly credible that Raja Baginda,
being without a male heir, appointed Abu Bakr, his son-in-law and
chief judge and priest, as his heir, and delegated to him all the
authority he exercised over Bwansa and the Island of Sulu. This
it appears was acquiesced in by the native chiefs who accepted
Abu Bakr as their temporal overlord, as well as their spiritual
master. Claiming descent from Mohammed, he assumed the powers of a
caliph and entitled himself sultan. The Sulus as a rule refer to him
as As-Sultan ash-Sharif al-Hashimi, meaning the Sultan, the Hashimite
Sharif or noble. The words Mohammed and Abu Bakr are generally left
out when he is mentioned in prayer or in ordinary discourse.

Having established the church, his next aim, after ascending the throne
of Sulu, was the political reorganization of the government. This he
undertook to frame on the same principles as those of an Arabian
sultanate, giving himself all the power and prerogatives of a
caliph. In enforcing such claims of absolute sovereignty, Abu Bakr
declared to the people and their local chiefs that the widows, the
orphans, and the land were his by right. This the people hesitated
to submit to, and another measure was adopted which reconciled the
interests of all parties. They agreed that all the shores of the
island and all that territory within which the royal gong or drum
could be heard should be the sultan's personal property, and that
the rest of the island should be divided among the subordinate
chiefs and their people. The island was accordingly divided into
five administrative districts, over each one of which one panglima
exercised power subject to the supervision and superior authority of
the sultan. These districts were again divided into smaller divisions,
which were administered by subordinate officers or chiefs called
maharaja, orangkaya, laksamana, parukka, etc. The districts were
called Parang, Pansul, Lati, Gi'tung, and Lu'uk. The boundaries which
it seemed necessary at that time to define were marked by large trees,
none of which is living at present. Thus a sangay [143] tree separated
Parang from Pansul. The location of this tree was at a point near Bud
Agad and the stream Agahun, which runs down from Tumangtangis toward
Maymbung. A bawnu [143] tree separated Pansul from Lati. This tree was
located at a place called Indung, intermediate between Asturias and
the walled town of Jolo. A mampalam [143] tree called Tarak separated
Lati from Lu'uk. It was in the vicinity of the settlement of Su'. A
variety of durian tree named Siggal-saggal formed the boundary of
Lati and Gi'tung.

According to later usage, these districts are defined as follows:
Parang is the western district lying west of a line passing through a
point east of the summit of Tumangtangis and a point on the southern
coast 3 miles west of Maymbung. A line passing through Mount Pula
and a point a little east of Maymbung marks the boundary between
Pansul on the west and Lati and Gi'tung on the east. The watershed is
generally considered as the dividing line between Lati and Gi'tung. A
line joining Su' on the north and Lubuk on the south separates Lati
and Gi'tung from Lu'uk. A sixth district has lately been carved out
and termed Tandu, forming the easternmost part of the island. A line
joining Sukuban on the south and Limawa on the north divides Tandu
and Lu'uk.

The government thus organized was conducted in conformity with local
customs and laws modified to such an extent as not to be repugnant
and contrary to Mohammedan laws and the precepts of the Quran. To
preserve this consistency, a code of laws was made and promulgated
by Abu Bakr. This, once established, became the guide of all the
subordinate officers of the state, who, as a rule, observed it and
carried out its instructions. The general lines on which Abu Bakr
conducted his government seem to have been followed very closely by all
his successors. Such an adventurous and aggressive man as he was could
not have stopped within the limits of the island. In all probability
he pushed out in various directions, but no records have so far been
found which give any account of the conquests he made or the limits
of his empire. Abu Bakr lived thirty years in Sulu and died about 1480.


EARLY DAYS OF THE SULTANATE, 1480-1635


SUCCESSORS OF ABU BAKR

The dynasty founded by Abu Bakr ruled with a firmer hand and attained
considerable power and fame. The new organization establishing
law and order, consolidated the forces of the state and increased
its influence on the outside world. Islam added a new element of
strength and another stimulus to campaign and conquest. The Sulus never
exceeded 60,000 in number, yet we learn that, prior to the arrival of
Magellan, their power was felt all over Luzon and the Bisayan Islands,
the Celebes Sea, Palawan, North Borneo, and the China Sea, and their
trade extended from China and Japan, at the one extreme, to Malacca,
Sumatra, and Java at the other.

Abu Bakr was succeeded by his second son, Kamalud-Din. Alawad-Din,
the elder son, was weak-minded and was evidently not supported by
the ministers of the state. The next three sultans who followed
were Diraja, Upu, and Digunung. Their full names are, the Sultan
Amirul Umara [144] Maharaja Diraja, the Sultan Mu`izzul Mutawadi`in
[145] Maharaja Upu, the Sultan Nasirud-Din Awal [146] Digunung [147]
(or Habud [148]).

The sixth sultan was Mohammedul Halim [149] Pangiran Buddiman. During
his reign Governor Sandé equipped and directed large expeditions to
Borneo and Sulu. The armada sent to Sulu was commanded by Capt. Esteban
Rodriguez de Figueroa and reached the town of Jolo in June, 1578. It
is asserted that Rodriguez defeated Pangiran and exacted tribute from
the Sulus. Rodriguez, however, did not occupy Jolo, and no permanent
advantage was derived from his victory.


FIGUEROA'S EXPEDITION AGAINST SULU

This invasion marked the beginning of a state of war between Sulu
and Spain, which covered a period of three hundred years and caused
considerable devastation and loss of life. It cost Spain an immense
loss of men and money and finally brought on the decline of Sulu
and its end as an independent state. The magnitude of this strife,
its far-reaching effects, and its bearing on the Spanish and American
occupation of Sulu, invites special attention to the causes of the
war and the Sulu character which it depicts.

The expedition to Jolo formed part of and immediately followed the
expedition which was directed by Governor Sandé against Borneo. There
is no doubt that, besides the reasons Sandé gave for the expedition
to Borneo, he was really actuated by jealousy of the Portuguese,
whose influence had reached Bruney and the Moluccas, and by a strong
desire to conquer Borneo, Sulu, Mindanao, and the Moluccas. His
reasons for sending the expedition against Sulu are best given in
his letter of instructions to Capt. Rodriguez de Figueroa, which is
extremely interesting and is herein quoted in full: [150]


    That which you, Capt. Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa, shall
    observe on the expedition which you are about to make, God our
    Lord helping, is as follows:

    From this city and Island of Borneo, God willing, you shall go
    to the Islands of Sulu, where you shall endeavor to reduce that
    chief and his people to the obedience of his Majesty. You shall
    bargain with them as to what tribute they shall pay, which shall
    be in pearls, as they are wont to give to the King of Bruney. You
    shall exercise great care and, if possible, much mildness; for it
    is of importance that those islands should not become depopulated;
    therefore, in case they receive you peaceably, you shall treat
    them well. And, in addition to the above, you must order that,
    besides the tribute that they are to pay in pearls, they shall
    obtain as many of them as possible, so that we, the Spaniards or
    Castilians, may buy them; that they must trade with us from now on;
    that every year Castilians will go to their lands with cloths and
    merchandise from China, of whatever they shall declare that they
    may need. You shall inform yourself of their needs; and if they
    wish to come to our settlements you shall give them permission to
    go freely to Manila and to come to Borneo, although not to steal.

    Item: You shall find out from them the whereabouts of the artillery
    and anchors of a ship lost there some three years ago; and you
    shall seek it and see that it be brought you with all haste. You
    shall keep close watch over the artillery, ammunition, vessels,
    sails, and other like things pertaining to the armed fleet; and
    you shall deprive them of those supplies, for it is notorious
    that those people are common marauders.

    And because of my information that the chief who calls himself
    lord of Sulu is a Bornean, and owns houses in this city of Bruney;
    that he fought against us in the naval battle, and that he fled
    to Sulu, where he is now; and since I am told that he took two
    galleys and three small vessels, artillery and ammunition, you
    shall exercise the utmost despatch to obtain the said galleys,
    vessels, artillery, and ammunition. If he acquiesce, you shall
    give him a passport. You shall see whether he has any children;
    and if so, you shall take one, and tell him that he must come to
    see me in Bruney in February.

    And, as I have said, this must be done if possible gently,
    in order that no people may be killed. You shall tell him that
    it will be to their advantage to be vassals of his Majesty and
    our allies. If they do not act respectfully, and it shall be
    necessary to punish them in another manner, you shall do so. And
    inasmuch as the Sulus, as is well known, are open pirates, whose
    only ambition is to steal, and to assault men in order to sell
    them elsewhere--especially as they go annually for plunder among
    all the Pintados [151] Islands, which are under his Majesty's
    dominion--you shall try to ascertain the Pintados slaves among
    them, in order to return such to their homes, especially those
    who are Christians. And, as I have said, you shall deprive them
    of such vessels as seem to be used for raids, leaving them their
    fishing vessels, so that if the said lord of Sulu so desire, he
    can come to confer reasonably with me. Thus you shall ascertain
    who has vessels, and who can inflict injuries; and you shall
    command them expressly to settle down on their land, to cultivate,
    sow, and harvest, develop the pearl industry, and cease to be
    pirates. You shall order them to raise fowls and cattle. You shall
    try to ascertain their number, and bring it to me in writing, in
    order that I may see it, together with the distance from these
    islands to the Sulu Islands, information regarding the food,
    water, and healthfulness of that land, and other things that may
    occur to you. And you shall tell the people in my name that they
    shall tame for me a couple of elephants, and that I shall send
    for those animals and pay for them.

    After having finished affairs in Sulu, if time permits, you shall,
    God willing, go to the Island of Mindanao. There you shall try,
    by the most convenient methods and with friendliness, to reduce
    the chief of the river of Mindanao, and the other chiefs of that
    island, and of those near by, to the obedience of his Majesty,
    giving him to understand what they will gain in becoming his
    Majesty's vassals and our allies, and in having trade with us.

    And, in order that the tribute may not prevent them from making
    peace with us, you shall not ask them for any tribute; but you
    shall take what they give freely, and nothing more, and in such
    form as they are willing to give. Thus you shall suit their
    convenience in everything pertaining to them, and cause them to
    understand the great expenses of his Majesty in this land. You
    shall also tell them that the gain therefrom affects them chiefly,
    since we come to teach them our civilization, and most of all
    the service of God, our Lord, who created and redeemed them, and
    of whom they are ignorant; and how to live in accord with natural
    law, as is their obligation. For this purpose you shall tell them
    that you are going to their land for two principal reasons:

    The first is that they should cease to be pirates, who rob and
    harry the weak, and enslave wherever and whomsoever they can,
    selling their captives outside of their own island, and separating
    them from their wives and children; and that they must cease to
    commit other like cruelties and thefts, and must become good and
    virtuous men, who shall grow to merit the second and principal
    reason for going to their lands. You shall give them to understand
    that they are ignorant of God, our Lord, who created and redeemed
    them, so that when they know him they may serve him and become
    good. It is quite evident that they will gain very much in these
    things, and therefore it is right that they aid us and give us
    something. This shall be at their own will, as above said.

    Item: You shall order them not to admit any more preachers of
    the doctrine of Mohammed, since it is evil and false, and that
    of the Christians alone is good. And because we have been in
    these regions so short a time, the lord of Mindanao has been
    deceived by the preachers of Bruney, and the people have become
    Moros. You shall tell them that our object is that he be converted
    to Christianity; and that he must allow us freely to preach the
    law of the Christians, and the natives must be allowed to go to
    hear the preaching and to be converted, without receiving any
    harm from the chiefs.

    And you shall try to ascertain who are the preachers of the sect
    of Mohammed, and shall seize and bring them before me and you
    shall burn or destroy the house where that accursed doctrine has
    been preached, and you shall order that it be not rebuilt.

    Item: You shall order that the Indians [152] shall not go outside
    of their island to trade; and you shall seize those vessels used
    for plundering excursions, leaving them those which, in your
    judgment, are used for trade and fishing. You shall take also
    what artillery and ammunition they have.

    You shall ascertain the harvest seasons and products of the land;
    the gold mines and the places where they wash gold; the number
    of inhabitants and their settlements; and their customs. You
    must especially secure information regarding cinnamon, in order
    to ascertain if it is found along the river, or if one must go
    to Cavite for it, and why it is not as good as that which the
    Portuguese take to Castilla. You shall ascertain how they cut
    and strip it from the tree, and if it be of importance that it
    dry on the tree, or in what other manner it should be treated,
    for I have been told that that obtained from these districts in
    the past has not been good and has not a good sale in Spain.

    And, since it might happen that the people will not make peace,
    and may offer fight, and show disrespect, then you shall punish
    them as you deem best, taking special care not to trust them;
    for it is evident that before all else they will, if possible,
    commit some treachery. You must not await such an occasion,
    for we know already their treachery against his Majesty's fleet
    commanded by Villalobos, certain of whose men they killed under
    assurances of safety; and they seized a boat. In that treachery
    all the inhabitants of the islands were participants; for four
    or five thousand of the said natives attacked one small boat,
    which contained four or five Spaniards. Likewise many people
    took part in the killing of the said Villalobos's master-of-camp,
    and other soldiers, in that same year. You shall remind them of
    these things, and warn them; for, from now on, we shall destroy
    them and their generation.

    And, since it might happen that, without any occasion of war
    or peace, the said natives flee to the mountains, you shall
    order that certain of the said natives summon them; and, when
    they have come, you shall discuss the matter with them. If they
    refuse to come, you shall, in conformity with your orders, remain
    there a given time. And if they continue to refuse to come down,
    you shall leave them, and shall return, without permitting their
    houses to be burned or their palm trees to be cut down. Neither
    shall anything be stolen from them; but you shall take only what
    is absolutely necessary for food and the food and other things
    necessary to provision your vessels for the return trip.

    You shall try to secure information of the Island of Linboton,
    as well as of Batachina and Celebes, so as to advise me thereof;
    and you shall do this in accord with the time limit I have set
    for you to make this exploration, and you shall observe the same
    rule as in that of Mindanao.

    In order that we may allot in encomiendas [153] whatever people
    are found in these districts, you shall bring me a signed
    notarial writ. Thus, as those lands have no other owner, the
    natives thereof may be reduced to the obedience of his Majesty,
    according to his will--and by war, if the natives begin it, so
    that war on our part may be just, and that the same justice may
    continue, so that we can compel them to obey, and impose tributes
    upon them. You shall exercise much diligence in this and see to
    it that these orders be carried out carefully and intelligently.

    God willing, I shall be in Bruney by the end of the month of
    January next--or, at the latest, by the eighth of February--with
    the fleet and all the necessaries that must be brought from Manila,
    and that which is here. And at that time your grace shall come to
    Bruney with the fleet that you have, and with all the people that
    you have or shall have in the Pintados, so that we may do here
    whatever is proper for the service of his Majesty, to which we are
    bound. These instructions must not be disregarded in any point,
    unless I advise you to the contrary by letter. And to this end
    you shall see that all who live and dwell there be commissioned
    for the above, in addition to their own duties. Given at Bruney,
    May twenty-three, one thousand five hundred and seventy-eight.

    If the natives of Mindanao or of any other place shall give
    tribute according to the above, you shall act according to the
    usual custom in these islands--namely, you shall take one-half
    and place it to the account of his Majesty, while the other half
    shall be distributed among the soldiers. Given ut supra.


    Doctor Francisco de Sandé.

        Before me:
            Alonso Beltran,
              His Majesty's notary.


REASONS FOR HOSTILITIES

The above shows clearly that Governor Sandé intended, first, to reduce
Sulu to a vassal state; second, to exact tribute in pearls; third,
to secure the trade of Sulu for the Spaniards; fourth, to punish the
Sultan of Sulu for the help he rendered the Sultan of Bruney against
the Spanish forces; fifth, to rescue the Christian slaves in Sulu;
sixth, to deprive the Sulus of their artillery and ammunition and of
all vessels except fishing vessels, in order to stop their piracy;
seventh, to compel the Sulus to become peaceful agriculturists;
eighth, to uproot the "accursed doctrine" of Mohammed and to convert
the Sulus to the Christian religion.

The leader of the expedition was directed to carry out these
instructions as carefully and as gently as possible; and there is
no reason to think that he failed to comply with his orders to the
letter. But no matter how careful and faithful Captain Rodriguez could
have been, it was not difficult for the Sulus to understand the purpose
of the expedition and the motives of the Spanish Government, and it
does not stand to reason that such people would yield to vassalage
and receive a direct insult to their religion without resentment
and without a struggle. Governor Sandé knew the reputation of the
Sulus, but he must have underestimated their strength and failed to
provide garrisons for the occupation of the conquered territory and
the protection of peaceful natives.

In January, 1579, Governor Sandé sent an expedition to Mindanao,
commanded by Capt. Gabriel de Ribera, under instructions similar to
those given to Captain Rodriguez. Ribera had additional orders to
visit Jolo and collect the tribute for that year, and special stress
was laid on procuring from the Sultan of Sulu "two or three tame
elephants." Ribera accomplished nothing in Mindanao; the natives
abandoned their villages and fled to the interior. On his return
to Kawite or Caldera, he met a deputation from Jolo, which brought
insignificant tribute and informed him of the existence of famine in
Sulu and the extreme distress of the people. He returned their tribute,
receiving in its place a cannon, which the Sulus had obtained from
a wrecked Portuguese galley. Ribera then returned to Cebu, without
producing any significant effect on conditions in Sulu.

In April, 1580, Governor Sandé was relieved by Governor Gonzalo
Ronquillo, who did not take the same interest in Borneo and
Sulu. In the same year the kingdom of Portugal and its rich eastern
colonies were annexed to the Spanish domain. No danger could then be
expected from the direction of Borneo and Sulu, and the ambitious
new Governor-General turned his attention to more desirable fields
of conquest.

Piracy was not the primary cause of this invasion of Sulu. Public
sentiment was not so strong against slavery in those days as it
is now; for the Spaniards and other leading civilized nations were
then diligently pursuing a profitable trade in it between the west
coast of Africa and the West Indies and America. Piracy is always a
crime among nations, but it can not be urged as the principal and
leading cause of this war or as sufficient reason in itself for
the early precipitation of such a deadly conflict between Sulu and
Spain. Religion, on the other hand, was declared by Governor Sandé
to be the "principal reason for going to their lands." He ordered
the Sulus not to admit any more preachers of Islam, but to allow
the Spanish priests to preach Christianity to them. The Mohammedan
preachers he directed to be arrested and brought to him, and the
mosques to be burned or destroyed and not to be rebuilt.

Part of the instructions the Adelantado [154] Miguel Lopez de Legaspi
received before embarking on his expedition to the Philippines read
as follows:


    And you shall have especial care that, in all your negotiations
    with the natives of those regions some of the religious
    accompanying you be present, both in order to avail yourself of
    their good counsel and advice, and so that the natives may see and
    understand your high estimation of them; for seeing this, and the
    great reverence of the soldiers toward them, they themselves will
    hold the religious in great respect. This will be of great moment,
    so that, when the religious shall understand their language,
    or have interpreters through whom they may make them understand
    our holy Catholic faith, the Indians shall put entire faith in
    them; since you are aware that the chief thing sought after by
    his Majesty is the increase of our holy Catholic faith, and the
    salvation of the souls of those infidels. [155]


In 1566, a petition was sent from Cebu to the King of Spain, bearing
the signatures of Martin de Goiti, Guido de Labezari, and the other
leading officers under Legaspi, setting forth, among other requests,
the following:


    That the Moros, "because they try to prevent our trade with the
    natives and preach to them the religion of Mohammed," may be
    enslaved and lose their property. That slave traffic be allowed,
    "that the Spaniards may make use of them, as do the chiefs and
    natives of those regions, both in mines and other works that
    offer themselves." [156]


In a letter addressed to Legaspi King Philip II said:


    We have also been petitioned in your behalf concerning the Moro
    Islands in that land, and how those men come to trade and carry on
    commerce, hindering the preaching of the holy gospel and disturbing
    you. We give you permission to make such Moros slaves and to seize
    their property. You are warned that you can make them slaves only
    if the said Moros are such by birth and choice, and if they come
    to preach their Mohammedan doctrine or to make war against you or
    against the Indians, who are our subjects and in our royal service.


In a letter addressed to King Philip II Bishop Salazar writes, June
27, 1588, as follows:


    The second point is that, in the Island of Mindanao, which is
    subject to your Majesty, and for many years has paid you tribute,
    the law of Mohammed has been publicly proclaimed, for somewhat more
    than three years, by preachers from Bruney and Ternate who have
    come there--some of them even, it is believed, having come from
    Mecca. They have erected and are now building mosques, and the
    boys are being circumcised, and there is a school where they are
    taught the Quran. I was promptly informed of this, and urged the
    president to supply a remedy therefor at once, in order that that
    pestilential fire should not spread in these islands. I could not
    persuade them to go, and thus the hatred of Christianity is there;
    and we are striving no more to remedy this than if the matter did
    not concern us. Such are the calamities and miseries to which we
    have come, and the punishments which God inflicts upon us. [157]


In drawing a contract with Capt. Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa, in
1591, for the pacification and conquest of Mindanao, the Governor
and Captain-General Gomez Perez Dasmariñas makes the following
declarations:


    His Majesty orders and charges me, by his royal instructions and
    decrees, as the most worthy and important thing in these islands,
    to strive for the propagation of our holy faith among the natives
    herein, their conversion to the knowledge of the true God, and
    their reduction to the obedience of His holy church and of the
    king, our sovereign. * * *

    Moreover, the Island of Mindanao is so fertile and well inhabited,
    and teeming with Indian settlements, wherein to plant the faith, *
     * * and is rich in gold mines and placers, and in wax, cinnamon,
    and other valuable drugs. And although the said island has been
    seen, discussed, and explored, * * * no effort has been made
    to enter and reduce it, nor has it been pacified or furnished
    with instruction or justice--quite to the contrary being, at
    the present time, hostile and refusing obedience to his Majesty;
    and no tribute, or very little, is being collected. * * *

    Besides the above facts, by delaying the pacification of the said
    island greater wrongs, to the offense and displeasure of God and
    of his Majesty, are resulting daily; for I am informed that the
    king of that island has made all who were paying tribute to his
    Majesty tributary to himself by force of arms, and after putting
    many of them to death while doing it; so that now each Indian pays
    him one tae [158] of gold. I am also told that he destroyed and
    broke into pieces, with many insults, a cross that he found, when
    told that it was adored by the Christians; and that in Magindanao,
    the capital and residence of the said king, are Bornean Indians
    who teach and preach publicly the false doctrine of Mohammed,
    and have mosques; besides these, there are also people from
    Ternate--gunners, armorers, and powder-makers, all engaged in
    their trades--who at divers times have killed many Spaniards when
    the latter were going to collect the tribute, * * * without our
    being able to mete out punishment, because of lack of troops. By
    reason of the facts above recited, and because all of the said
    wrongs and troubles will cease with the said pacification; and,
    when it is made, we are sure that the surrounding kingdoms of
    Bruney, Sulu, Java, and other provinces, will become obedient
    to his Majesty: therefore, in order that the said island may be
    pacified, subdued, and settled, and the gospel preached to the
    natives; and that justice may be established among them, and they
    be taught to live in a civilized manner, and to recognize God and
    His holy law, I have tried to entrust the said pacification to
    a person of such character that he may be entrusted with it. [159]


It is plain, therefore, that the sentiment of the times justified war
on the Moros for the cause of religion alone, and that, though the
primary object was conquest, no doubt the religious motives of the
Spaniards were stronger than their desire to check piracy. But, of all
the Christian nations, the Spaniards should have been most aware of the
tenacity, determination, and courage with which the Mohammedans defend
their faith, and the Sulus were no exception to the rule, for they had
been born and reared in that religion for more than four generations.

A wiser policy on the part of Governor Sandé would have either let the
Moros of Sulu and Mindanao alone, or effected a complete reduction of
the state of Sulu and immediate occupation of the coasts of Mindanao
with strong forces; for it appears from all accounts that neither
the Sulus nor the Magindanaos were as strongly organized then as they
were a generation later, and either alliance or war should have been
easier then than afterwards.

The Spaniards at that time were excellent warriors. Their conquests
of the Bisayan Islands and Luzon were rapid and brilliant, but it
appears that the system of government which they inaugurated there
met with distinct failure the minute it was extended to the more
organized communities and the greater forces they encountered in the
south. The Sulus, on the other hand, fought in the defense of their
national independence and religion, and never found life too dear
to sacrifice in that cause. They resented the treatment of Spain,
and in their rage and desire for revenge built stronger forts and
fleets and became fiercer pirates.


RULE OF BATARA SHAH TANGAH

Pangiran must have died about 1579 and was followed by Sultan
Batara Shah Tangah, who is in all probability the Paquian or Paguian
Tindig of the Spanish writers. Tangah's claim to the sultanate was
strongly contested by his cousin, Abdasaolan [160] who ruled over
Basilan. The latter attacked Jolo with a strong force, but failed
to reduce its forts. Tangah, however, felt insecure and went to
Manila to request Governor Sandé's aid and returned to Sulu with
two Spanish armed boats (caracoas). [161] Abdasaolan, whose power
had in the meantime increased, prepared for defense and watched for
the advance of the Sultan's boat. Finding that the caracoas were at
a considerable distance from the Sultan's boat he manned two light
salisipans [162] with a strong force and dispatched them, with speed
to intercept Tangah. The Sultan's party was completely surprised,
and in the fight that resulted Tangah was killed. On reaching Jolo
the Spanish forces attacked the town. The Sulus fought valiantly,
but their fort was reduced. The officers in command of the caracoas
assembled the people and had Raja Bungsu, who was wounded in the fight,
elected sultan to succeed Tangah. The full title of Bungsu was "The
Sultan Muwallil Wasit Bungsu." [163]


FIGUEROA'S EXPEDITION AGAINST MINDANAO

In 1596 Capt. Esteban Rodriguez led an expedition into Mindanao,
for its conquest and pacification.

It is maintained that he proceeded up the Mindanao River as far as
Bwayan, the capital of the upper Mindanao Valley.


    Don Esteban Rodriguez prepared men and ships, and what else was
    necessary for the enterprise, and with some galleys, galleots,
    frigates, vireys, [164] barangays, [164] and lapis, [165] set out
    with two hundred and fourteen Spaniards for the Island of Mindanao,
    in February of the same year, of 1596. He took Capt. Juan de la
    Xara as his master-of-camp, and some religious of the Society
    of Jesus to give instruction, as well as many natives for the
    service of the camp and fleet.

    He reached Mindanao River after a good voyage, where the first
    settlements, named Tampakan and Lumakan, both hostile to the
    people of Bwayan, received him peacefully and in a friendly
    manner, and joined his fleet. They were altogether about six
    thousand men. Without delay they advanced about 8 leagues
    farther up the river against Bwayan, the principal settlement
    of the island, where its greatest chief had fortified himself
    on many sides. Arrived at the settlement, the fleet cast anchor
    and immediately landed a large proportion of the troops with
    their arms. But before reaching the houses and fort, and while
    going through some thickets [cacatal] [166] near the shore, they
    encountered some of the men of Bwayan, who were coming to meet
    them with their kampilan, [167] carazas [168] and other weapons,
    and who attacked them on various sides. The latter [i.e., the
    Spaniards and their allies], on account of the swampiness of the
    place and the denseness of the thickets [cacatal], could not act
    unitedly as the occasion demanded, although the master-of-camp and
    the captains that led them exerted themselves to keep the troops
    together and to encourage them to face the natives. Meanwhile
    Governor Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa was watching events from
    his flagship, but not being able to endure the confusion of his
    men, seized his weapons and hastened ashore with three or four
    companions and a servant who carried his helmet in order that he
    might be less impeded in his movements. But as he was crossing
    a part of the thickets [cacatal] where the fight was waging,
    a hostile Indian stepped out unseen from one side and dealt the
    governor a blow on the head with his kampilan that stretched
    him on the ground badly wounded. [169] The governor's followers
    cut the Mindanao to pieces and carried the governor back to the
    camp. Shortly after the master-of-camp, Juan de la Xara, withdrew
    his troops to the fleet, leaving behind several Spaniards who had
    fallen in the encounter. The governor did not regain consciousness,
    for the wound was very severe, and died next day. The fleet after
    that loss and failure left that place, and descended the river
    to Tampakan, where it anchored among the friendly inhabitants
    and their settlements.

    The master-of-camp, Juan de la Xara, had himself chosen by the
    fleet as successor in the government and enterprise. He built a
    fort with arigues [170] and palms near Tampakan, and founded a
    Spanish settlement to which he gave the name of Murcia. He began
    to make what arrangements he deemed best, in order to establish
    himself and run things independently of, and without acknowledging
    the governor of Manila, without whose intervention and assistance
    this enterprise could not be continued. [171]


Bwayan was 30 miles up the river and 25 miles above Magindanao
or Kotabato where Bwisan, the Sultan of Magindanao, was strongly
fortified. It is difficult to believe that Rodriguez could advance so
far even with a small scouting party. A careful review of the Spanish
reports referring to these early campaigns in Mindanao indicates that
Bwayan has been erroneously used in place of Magindanao, the ancient
capital of the sultanate of Magindanao.

Bent on the conquest of Mindanao, Governor Tello prepared another
expedition under Gen. Juan Ronquillo [172] and dispatched it by the
way of Cebu. At Caldera, it was joined by the fleet of Mindanao and
the whole force proceeded east in the direction of the Mindanao River,
on the 6th of February, 1597. Captain Chaves arrived with his frigates
at the river on the 8th of January. In a battle fought at Simway
to capture Moro vessels going to seek aid from Ternate he had a leg
cut off and received a shot in the helmet above the ear. Ronquillo
arrived at the mouth of the river on February 21, and on the 17th of
April he engaged a Moro fleet with 40 arquebusiers and defeated them,
killing a number of their brave men and some Ternatans without losing
any of his men except 5 Bisayans. Leaving a guard of 34 men under
Chaves at the fort of Tampakan he advanced up the river with a force
of 230 sailors and gunners. The enemy retired behind some parapets as
soon as the artillery opened upon them, and brought some artillery
to bear on the flagship (one of the galleys), but could not retard
the Spanish advance.


    "I answered their fire with so great readiness," said Ronquillo in
    his report, "that I forced them to withdraw their artillery. But,
    as if they were goblins, they remained here behind a bush or a
    tree, firing at us without being seen." Reinforced by the chief
    of the hill tribes, Lumakan, with 500 natives, Ronquillo resumed
    the fighting after the delay of a few days. "Finally," continued
    Ronquillo, "I planted my battery of eight pieces somewhat over
    100 paces from the fort. Although I battered the fort hotly, I
    could not effect a breach through which to make an assault. All
    the damage that I did them by day, they repaired by night. * * *

    "I was very short of ammunition, for I had only 3,000 arquebus
    bullets left, and very few cannon balls; and both would be spent
    in one day's fighting, during which, should we not gain the fort,
    we would be lost--and with no power to defend ourselves while
    withdrawing our artillery and camp. * * *

    "I reconnoitered the fort and its situation, for it is located
    at the entrance of a lagoon, thus having only water at the back,
    and swampy and marshy ground at the sides. It has a frontage of
    more than 1,000 paces, is furnished with very good transversals,
    and is well supplied with artillery and arquebuses. Moreover it
    has a ditch of water more than 4 brazas [173] wide and 2 deep,
    and thus there was a space of dry ground of only 15 paces where it
    was possible to attack; and this space was bravely defended, and
    with the greatest force of the enemy. The inner parts were water,
    where they sailed in vessels, while we had no footing at all."

    "Again, I reflected that those who had awaited us so long, had
    waited with the determination to die in defense of the fort; and
    if they should see the contest ending unfavorably for them, no one
    would prevent their flight. Further, if they awaited the assault
    it would cost me the greater part of my remaining ammunition,
    and my best men; while, if the enemy fled, nothing would be
    accomplished, but on the contrary a long, tedious, and costly
    war would be entered upon. Hence, with the opinion and advice of
    the captains, I negotiated for peace, and told them that I would
    admit them to friendship under the following conditions:

    "First, that first and foremost they must offer homage to his
    Majesty, and pay something as recognition" (a gold chain). Second,
    "that all the natives who had been taken from the Pintados Islands
    [Bisayan Islands] last year, must be restored." Third, "that they
    must break the peace and confederation made with the people of
    Ternate, and must not admit the latter into their country." Fourth,
    "that they must be friends with Danganlibor and Lumakan, * * *
    and must not make war on their vassals." Fifth, "that all the
    chiefs must go to live in their old villages." [174]


Ronquillo later reported the place indefensible and was authorized
to retire to Caldera.

Ronquillo must have advanced as far as the settlement of Kalangnan
or possibly Magindanao (Kotabato), the capital of Sultan Bwisan. The
report he rendered relative to the country, its people and chiefs,
is very interesting and an excerpt of the same is herewith quoted
because of its bearing on conditions throughout Moroland:


    The leading chiefs collect tribute from their vassals. * * * These
    Indians are not like those in Luzon, but are accustomed to power
    and sovereignty. Some collect five or six thousand tributes. * * *

    Hitherto it has not been possible to tell your lordship anything
    certain of this country except that it will be of but little
    advantage to his Majesty, but a source of great expense. It has
    far fewer inhabitants than was reported, and all are very poor,
    so that their breakfast consists only in cleaning their arms,
    and their work in using them, and not in cultivating the land,
    which is low and swampy in this river. There is no chief who can
    raise 20 taes of gold. Rice is very scarce; in the hills is found
    a small amount, which is used for food by the chiefs only. There
    are some swine, and a few fowls that are very cunning, and less
    fruit. [175]


These early expeditions of the Spaniards against the Moros undoubtedly
aroused in the latter a great desire for vengeance. The forces the
Spaniards sent to conquer Mindanao and Sulu were very small. Such
forces would have been strong enough to reduce any island of the
Bisayan group, or even Luzon, but against the Moros they proved
insufficient and inadequate. They however succeeded in provoking
bitter hostilities and marked the beginning of a long period of terror
and bloodshed.


MORO RAIDS [176]

In 1599 combined Moro fleets invaded and plundered the coasts of the
Bisayan Islands, Cebu, Negros, and Panay.

Captain Paches, who was in command of the fort of Caldera, attacked
the northern coast of the Island of Sulu. After landing at some point,
it was observed by the Sulus that his fuses were wet and that his
guns could not fire well. They then rushed his position, killed him,
and dispersed his forces.


    The following year saw the return of a larger and still more
    dreadful expedition. The people of Panay abandoned their towns
    and fled into the mountains under the belief that these terrible
    attacks had been inspired by the Spaniards. To check these
    pirates, Juan Gallinato, with a force of 200 Spaniards, was sent
    against Sulu, but like so many expeditions that followed his,
    he accomplished nothing. * * * "From this time until the present
    day" (about the year 1800), wrote Zuñiga, "these Moros have not
    ceased to infest our colonies; innumerable are the Indians they
    have captured, the towns they have looted, the rancherias they
    have destroyed, and the vessels they have taken. It seems as
    if God has preserved them for vengeance on the Spaniards that
    they have not been able to subject them in two hundred years,
    in spite of the expeditions sent against them, the armaments
    sent almost every year to pursue them. In a very little while
    we conquered all the islands of the Philippines, but the little
    Island of Sulu, a part of Mindanao, and the other islands nearby,
    we have not been able to subjugate to this day." [177]


Gallinatos's expedition occurred in 1602. [178] After three months of
protracted fighting at Jolo, he was unable to reduce the fortifications
of the town and retired to Panay.

In 1616 a large Sulu fleet destroyed Pantao in the Camarines and the
shipyards of Cavite and exacted large sums for the ransom of Spanish
prisoners. Moro fleets in 1625 sacked Katbalogan in Samar.

In 1628 Governor Tavora sent an expedition to Sulu under Cristobol
de Lugo. Cristobol disembarked half of his infantry, sacked the town
of Jolo, set part of it on fire and sailed back to Cebu.

In 1629 the Moros raided Samar and Leyte. In 1630 an armada composed
of 70 vessels and having 350 Spanish and 2,000 native soldiers, under
Lorenzo de Olaso Ochotegui, arrived at Jolo. Olaso misdirected his
forces and, advancing too near to the wall of the fort, was wounded
in his side and fell. He was rescued by the officers who followed him,
but the troops were demoralized and retired. The expedition, however,
landed at various points on the coast and burned and pillaged small
settlements. [179]

In the same year P. Gutierrez came to Mindanao on a mission to
Corralat. [180] On his return he met Tuan Baluka, wife of Raja Bungsu,
at Zamboanga. Baluka urged P. Gutierrez to delay his departure from
Zamboanga and warned him of the danger of meeting the Sulu expedition
under Datu Ache. He, however, continued on his way and was overtaken by
Datu Ache's force, but on account of the message and flag he delivered
to Ache from Tuan Baluka, he was allowed to proceed safely.

For some time the Jesuits had been urging upon the Philippine
Government the occupation of the southern coast of Mindanao. This
meant an advance into the enemy's camp and a bloody struggle for
supremacy in the southern seas. The consequences of such a step
were foreseen by the Government and very few governors would have
dared undertake such a grave responsibility. In 1635, Governor Juan
Cerezo de Salamanca was petitioned by the Jesuits to establish an
advance post of the Spanish forces at Zamboanga for the protection of
missionaries and the Christians who had to navigate in the southern
seas. Salamanca granted their request and sent Capt. Juan de Chaves,
who disembarked at Zamboanga on the 6th of April, 1635. The force under
Captain Chaves consisted of 300 Spanish and 1,000 native soldiers. In
June they began the construction of a stone fort on a plan designed by
the Jesuit missionary P. Melchor de Vera, who was an expert engineer.

The advantages to be derived from the position of this garrison
were demonstrated before the year was over. As a piratical fleet
was returning from Cuyo, Mindoro, and the Kalamian Islands, the
favorable opportunity was watched for, and as the two divisions of
the fleet separated, the Spanish forces pursued Corralat's pirates
and dealt them a deadly blow in the neighborhood of Point Flechas,
killing about 300 Moros and saving 120 Christian captives. [181]


FIRST SPANISH CONQUEST AND OCCUPATION OF SULU, 1635-1646

Gen. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera relieved Salamanca before the end
of the year 1635 and continued the same policy with additional vigor
and great ability. He quickly resolved upon attacking the Moros in
their own strongholds, and thought that by crushing their power at
home he would be able to put an end to their piratical raids.

He arrived at Zamboanga February 22, 1636, proceeded first to Mindanao,
fought Corralat and destroyed some of his forts and sailed back to
Manila. [182] Corcuera returned to Zamboanga in December, 1637,
and prepared for an expedition against Sulu. On January 1, 1638,
he embarked for Sulu with 600 Spanish soldiers, 1,000 native troops,
and many volunteers and adventurers. He had 80 vessels all told and
arrived at Jolo on the 4th. [183]

Anticipating an invasion, Sultan Bungsu had strengthened his
garrisons and called for aid and reënforcements from Basilan, Tapul,
and Tawi-tawi. On his arrival Corcuera found the town well fortified
and the enemy strongly intrenched. The Moros were well disciplined
and had a well organized guard. The forts occupied strategic points
and were strongly defended; the trenches were well laid, and the
Moros shot well and fought fearlessly.

Corcuera besieged the town with all his forces and attacked it
repeatedly and valiantly using powerful artillery, but he could not
reduce it. Several efforts to tunnel the walls or effect a breach in
them by mines were frustrated by the vigilance and intrepidity of
the Sulus. The siege lasted three months and a half, at the end of
which time the Sulus evacuated the town and retired to the neighboring
hills, where they intended to make the next stand. Corcuera, taking
possession of the town, reconstructed its forts and established three
posts, one on the hill, one at the river, and one on the sandbank in
front of the town. The garrison he established there consisted of 200
Spanish soldiers and an equal number of Pampangans, under the command
of Capt. Ginés Ros and Gaspar de Morales. In May Corcuera returned to
Manila with all the triumph of a conqueror, leaving Gen. Pedro Almonte,
the senior officer next to himself in command of the expedition, as
governor of Zamboanga and Ternate and chief of the forces in the south.

Soon after the establishment of the Jolo garrison, the Sulus under Datu
Ache attacked the soldiers in the quarry and killed a few Spaniards
and captured 40 Chinese and Negroes (galley slaves). This and other
depredations committed by the Sulus from time to time, some of which
were provoked by the ill behavior of the Spanish officers and troops,
forced Almonte in June, 1639, to come over to Sulu and take the field
a second time. With 3 captains and 1,200 Spanish and native soldiers,
he marched over the island, attacked the Sulus in their homes, burned
their houses and killed every man he could reach. It is said that he
hung 500 heads on the trees, liberated 112 Christian captives, and
captured quantities of arms. When he asked the Gimbaha Sulus (at one
of the settlements of Parang) to submit to the sovereignty of Spain,
they refused to recognize his authority, challenged his forces,
and fought him desperately. They wore helmets and armor and used
spears and swords. On one occasion, Captain Cepeda engaged them in
battle and returned with 300 captives, leaving on the field 400 dead,
a fearful lesson to those who survived. Cepeda lost 7 Spaniards and
20 natives only, but he had a large number wounded.

Not satisfied with the havoc he wrought on the Island of Sulu, and
desiring to follow and catch the fugitive sultan, Almonte invaded
the other large islands and followed the sultan and the datus all
over the Archipelago. At Tawi-tawi, however, he met with a reverse,
and the captain who led the expedition returned with considerable loss.

Soon after Almonte's departure, the Sulus who had fled returned
and lost no time or opportunity in harassing the garrison. Several
piratical excursions invaded the Bisayas and Camarines. Soon Dutch
vessels, invited by Sulu emissaries sent to Java, appeared in the
vicinity of Zamboanga and Jolo and threatened the Spanish garrison
and incited the Moros to resist the Spaniards and attack their
forces. Anticipating trouble with the Dutch, and foreseeing the
danger of maintaining a garrison at Jolo under the circumstances,
the Spaniards planned to evacuate the town. Accordingly on the 14th
of April, 1646, they left Jolo. Before withdrawing their troops,
they managed to make a treaty with the Sulus, which took the form of
an alliance both offensive and defensive. The purpose of the treaty
was declared to be the maintenance of peace between both parties and
mutual aid against foreign enemies. In case of assistance against a
foreign nation, the expenses of the war were to be defrayed by the
party requesting aid. The Spanish Government recognized the supreme
authority of the Sultan of Sulu from Tawi-tawi to Tutup and Pagahak,
reserving sovereignty rights for the King of Spain over Tapul, Siasi,
Balangingi, and Pangutaran only. In return for the evacuation of Jolo,
and as a sign of brotherhood, the Sultan of Sulu promised to send
yearly to Zamboanga three boats, 8 fathoms long, full of rice, and to
allow the Jesuit priests to come to Jolo unmolested. Other provisions
were inserted in the treaty for the exchange and redemption of slaves,
criminals, or others who happened to run away from Zamboanga to Sulu
and vice versa.

This treaty did not remain in force for any great length of time,
for we hear again in 1647 that the Sulus invaded the Bisayas and
harassed the vicinity of Zamboanga.


SULU SUPREMACY IN THE ARCHIPELAGO, 1647-1850


SUCCESSORS OF BUNGSU

Bungsu had a very long reign marked with reverses and misfortunes. He
died before 1640, and was succeeded by Sultan Nasirud Din II and Sultan
Salahud Din Karamat. The latter was known to the Spanish writers as
Baktial, which was his Sulu name before the sultanate. During the
reign of Karamat the Philippines were threatened by a Chinese invasion
from the north and by war with Holland, and the government, under the
circumstances, decided to abandon Zamboanga and the Moluccas. This
purpose they carried out in 1663. In the days of Karamat the Sulus
became very active and made many raids in various directions. The
decline of Spain's political power and her inactivity in the century
that followed the evacuation of Zamboanga caused obscurity in the
Spanish records of the history of Sulu and Mindanao. The events of
this century are, with few exceptions, lacking in significance and
interest. [184]

The sultans who followed Karamat are, in the order of their succession,
Shahabud Din, Mustafa Shafi`ud Din, Badarud Din I, Nasarud Din,
and Alimud Din I, better known as Amirul Mu'minin (Ferdinand I of
Sulu). The first three were brothers, the sons of Karamat, while the
last two were the sons of Badarud Din.

In 1718 Governor Bustamante reoccupied Zamboanga for the purpose
of waging war against piracy. "The citadel (Fuerza del Pilar) was
rebuilt on an elaborate plan under the direction of the engineer, Juan
Sicarra. Besides the usual barracks, storehouses, and arsenals, there
were, within the walls, a church, a hospital, and quarters for the
Pampangan soldiers. Sixty-one cannon were mounted upon the defenses."

In 1725, a Chinese named Ki Kuan was sent to Manila to arrange for
peace and returned with two Spanish commissioners, who made a treaty
with the sultan of Sulu providing for trade between Manila and Jolo,
the return or ransom of captives, and the ceding to Spain of the
Island of Basilan. Notwithstanding this treaty Moro raids continued
either by toleration of the sultan and datus or at their instigation.

In 1730 a brother of the sultan commanded an expedition of 31
vessels, which attacked the fort of Taytay and ravaged the coast of
Palawan. Another expedition spent nearly a whole year cruising and
destroying among the Bisayas.

In retaliation a large Spanish fleet united at Zamboanga and, under
Ignacio de Irebri and Manuel del Rosal, invaded the shores of Sulu and
ravaged and burned some settlements. At Bwal they found the settlement
well protected and extensively fortified, so they contented themselves
with destroying some plantations and burning outlying houses. At
Tapul considerable damage was inflicted. A force of 600 disembarked,
dispersed the Sulus, burned their settlements, destroyed many farms,
the salt works, and many boats, and returned to Zamboanga. In 1732
similar raids were made and hostilities continued until 1737.


REIGN OF SULTAN ALIMUD DIN I

One of the earliest events in the reign of Alimud Din I was his
ratification of the treaty of 1737. The sultan was represented
in Manila by Datu Mohammed Ismael and Datu Ja`far, who signed the
document. The treaty was drawn in January, 1737, by Governor-General
Fernando Valdés y Tamon and contained five articles.

The first article declared the determination of both parties to
preserve permanent peace between the two states, all differences or
grievances to be settled amicably, and hostilities between subjects
or vassals to be strictly prohibited and punished; the second provided
for alliance and mutual aid against any foreign foe. European nations
were, however, excluded from the provisions of this article; the third
provided for free trade between the two states, restricted by the use
of passports to be issued by superior authority; the fourth provided
that each state should be held responsible for all infractions of
the peace committed by its subjects and should be bound to punish the
same and make proper amends to the proper party; the fifth provided
for the exchange of captives and return of all church images and
ornaments in the possession of the Sulus.

To all appearances Alimud Din I was a man of peace and a reformer. He
kept his part of the treaty faithfully and piracy was actually
suppressed during the whole period in which he held the reins of
government. He revised the Sulu code of laws and system of justice. He
caused to be translated into Sulu parts of the Quran and several Arabic
texts on law and religion. He strongly urged the people to observe
faithfully their religion and the ordained five daily prayers. He even
went so far as to prescribe punishment for failure to observe this
rule. He wanted all pandita to learn Arabic and prepared Arabic-Sulu
vocabularies as a preliminary step to making the Arabic the official
language of the state. He coined money, organized a small army,
and tried to establish a navy. His name is foremost in the memory
of the Sulus, partly because of his able administration and partly
on account of the fact that he is the grandfather of all the present
principal datus of the Sulus.

In September, 1746, a special commission from Manila carried to
Alimud Din a letter written by King Philip V in 1744, requesting the
admission of Jesuit missionaries to Jolo with permission to preach
the Christian religion to the Sulus. The sultan entertained the
commission very hospitably and gave in their honor a royal reception
and a review of the troops. A council was held in which the sultan
conferred with the leading datus of Sulu and granted the request of
King Philip V. He further authorized the building of a church and
recommended the erection of a fort at some convenient locality for
the safe protection of the missionaries. In return for this favor he
requested that the Spanish Government give him, as an aid in building
a navy, the sum of P6,000, 12 piculs [185] of gunpowder, 12 piculs
of nails, and 1 picul of steel. This, he represented, was needed to
enable him to suppress piracy and to check the depredations of his
enemies in Borneo. This request the Spanish Government granted, and
Jesuit missionaries entered Jolo, translated the catechism into Sulu,
and distributed it freely among the people.

The liberties exercised by the Jesuits in their endeavor to proselyte
the Sulus and the strong friendship the sultan manifested toward them
created great dissatisfaction among the people, and an opposition party
was formed, under the leadership of Prince Bantilan, for the purpose of
expelling the missionaries and deposing Alimud Din. Bantilan was the
son of Sultan Shahabud Din and had as much right to the sultanate of
Sulu as any son of Sultan Badarud Din. After the death of the latter
the sultanate should have reverted to the line of Shahabud Din; but it
happens very often that the sons of the last sultan are either older
than those of the former or meet with more favor and are, as a rule,
supported by the majority of the council of datus; thus the regular
order of descent changes in favor of the stronger person. Probably
Bantilan was preceded by both Nasarud Din and Alimud Din for some
such reason as the above. This he resented at heart, but suppressed
his resentment until this favorable opportunity offered itself. He
then headed the opposition to the sultan and the missionaries and won
the majority of the datus and panditas to his side. Hostilities soon
increased and civil war was imminent. In an effort to assassinate
the sultan, Bantilan thrust a spear at Alimud Din and inflicted
a severe wound in his side or thigh. During the disturbances and
confusion which followed it became dangerous for the missionaries
to remain at Jolo. One of the ministers of the sultan provided them
with a salisipan in which they escaped without harm and withdrew to
Zamboanga. This occurred late in 1748. Overpowered, disheartened,
and grieved, Alimud Din left Jolo with his family and numerous escort
and came to Zamboanga, seeking the aid of Spain against Bantilan. The
latter proclaimed himself sultan with the title of Mu`izzud Din,
[186] strengthened the defenses of his capital, and waged war on all
the datus who had supported Alimud Din. His power soon became supreme,
and he reigned with a strong hand.

At Zamboanga Alimud Din is said to have given the officers many
presents and offered the Governor Zacharias 40 male Papuan slaves, who
were well dressed. Zacharias, unreasonably prejudiced and distrustful,
suspected some ill design and refused the present. Not receiving
sufficient attention and consideration at Zamboanga, Alimud Din asked
leave to go to Manila. This granted, he sailed and arrived at Cavite
January 2, 1749. At Manila "he was received with all the pomp and
honor due to a prince of high rank. A house for his entertainment
and his retinue of seventy persons was prepared in Binondo. A public
entrance was arranged which took place some fifteen days after he
reached the city. Triumphal arches were erected across the streets,
which were lined with more than 2,000 native militia under arms. The
sultan was publicly received in the hall of the Audiencia, where
the governor promised to lay his case before the King of Spain. The
sultan was showered with presents, which included chains of gold,
fine garments, precious gems, and gold canes, while the Government
sustained the expense of his household." [187]

Following this reception, steps were taken for his conversion. His
spiritual advisers cited to him the example of the Emperor Constantine
whose conversion enabled him to effect triumphant conquests over
his enemies. Under these representations Alimud Din expressed his
desire for baptism. The governor-general, who at this time was a
priest, the bishop of Nueva Segovia, was very anxious that the rite
should take place; but this was opposed by his spiritual superior,
the archbishop of Manila, who, with some others, entertained doubts
as to the sincerity of the Sultan's profession.

"In order to accomplish his baptism, the governor sent him to his own
diocese, where at Paniki, on the 29th of April, 1750, the ceremony
took place with great solemnity. On the return of the party to Manila,
the sultan was received with great pomp, and in his honor were held
games, theatrical representations, fireworks, and bull fights. This
was the high-water mark of the sultan's popularity. [188]

At his baptism the sultan received the name of Ferdinand, and Spanish
authors often referred to him as "Don Fernando de Alimud Din I,
Catholic Sultan of Joló." It is further stated that two datus and
five of his principal followers were baptized. The crown prince,
Raja Muda Mohammed Israel and his sister Fatimah attended school in
Manila and learned Spanish manners and customs.

A year and a half passed and no action was taken by the authorities
to restore Alimud Din. In the meantime Bantilan's fleets were busy
ravaging and pillaging the Bisayas. In July, 1750, a new governor, the
marquis of Obando (Francisco José de Obando) arrived in Manila. After
some deliberation he resolved to reinstate Alimud Din and punish
Bantilan and his pirates. [189] Accordingly, on May 19, 1751, the
sultan and his retinue were sent on board the Spanish frigate San
Fernando and were convoyed by a squadron composed of seven war vessels
under the command of Field Marshal Ramon de Abad. Falling in with
bad weather off the shore of Mindoro, the San Fernando was disabled
and made for Kalapan. The squadron, however, continued its voyage
uninterrupted to Jolo, arriving there on the 26th of June. After some
desultory fighting, Abad arrived at an understanding with the Sulus
and arranged for Datu Asin to come to Zamboanga with sufficient boats
to escort the sultan back to Jolo.

The sultan in the meantime stopped at Iloilo where he changed
boats. Meeting with contrary winds he was carried off his course to
Dapitan, and from there he set sail again for Zamboanga, which he
reached on July 12.


    Before Ferdinand I left Manila, he had addressed a letter
    to the sultan of Mindanao, at the instance of the Spanish
    Governor-General. The original was written by Ferdinand I in Moro;
    a version in Spanish was dictated by him, and both were signed by
    him. These documents reached the governor of Zamboanga, but he
    had the original in Moro retranslated and found that it did not
    at all agree with the sultan's Spanish rendering. The translation
    of the Moro text runs thus:

    "I shall be glad to know that the Sultan Mohammed Amirud Din
    and all his chiefs, male and female, are well. I do not write
    a lengthy letter, as I intended, because I simply wish to give
    you to understand, in case the sultan or his chiefs and others
    should feel aggrieved at my writing this letter in this manner,
    that I do so under pressure, being under foreign dominion, and
    I am compelled to obey whatever they tell me to do, and I have
    to say what they tell me to say. Thus the governor has ordered
    me to write to you in our style and language; therefore, do not
    understand that I am writing you on my own behalf, but because
    I am ordered to do so, and I have nothing more to add. Written
    in the year 1164 in the month Rabi`-ul Akir. Ferdinand I, King
    of Sulu, who seals with his own seal."

    This letter was pronounced treasonable. Impressed with, or feigning
    this idea, Governor Zacharias saw real or imaginary indications
    of a design on the part of the sultan to throw off the foreign
    yoke at the first opportunity. [190]


After the landing of Datu Asin and his followers at Zamboanga, the
governor found out by his spies that they had many arms and quantities
of ammunition in their boats which lay in the roadstead opposite
the town and fort. Suspicious and distrustful from the beginning,
Zacharias interpreted these facts as positive proof of an intention
on the part of the sultan and Datu Asin treacherously to attack the
town when an opportunity offered itself. He then at once confiscated
part of the arms, ordered the boats to leave the port, imprisoned
the sultan and Datu Asin and all their retinue, and communicated his
suspicions and the action taken to Manila. Among the prisoners were
the sons and daughters of the sultan, several datus and dignitaries
and panditas, and many male and female followers and servants. In
all 217 persons entered the prisons of the fort, most of whom were
later transferred to Manila and confined in Fort Santiago.

Zacharias's interpretation of the action of the sultan and Datu Asin
was simply absurd and his behavior reflected considerable discredit
on his ability as an officer and administrator. It was further most
regrettable that his views were accepted as true by higher authority
in Manila where no clemency or redress was extended to the unfortunate
sultan and datus.

By a degree of the Governor-General, the following accusations were
set forth against the sultan and Datu Asin, viz:


    1. That Prince Asin had not surrendered captives; 2. That whilst
    the sultan was in Manila, new captives were made by the party who
    expelled him from the throne; 3. That the number of arms brought
    to Zamboanga by Sulu chiefs was excessive; 4. That the letter to
    Sultan Mohammed Amirud Din insinuated help wanted against the
    Spaniards; 5. That several Mohammedan, but no Christian books,
    were found in the sultan's baggage; 6. That during the journey to
    Zamboanga he had refused to pray in Christian form; 7. That he had
    only attended mass twice; 8. That he had celebrated Mohammedan
    rites, sacrificing a goat, and had given evidence in a hundred
    ways of being a Mohammedan; 9. That his conversation generally
    denoted a want of attachment to the Spaniards, and a contempt for
    their treatment of him in Manila, [191] and, 10. That he still
    cohabited with his concubines.

    The greatest stress was laid on the recovery of the captive
    Christians, and the governor added, that although the mission
    of the fleet was to restore the sultan to the throne (which,
    by the way, he does not appear to have attempted), the principal
    object was the rescue of Christian slaves. He therefore proposed
    that the liberty of the imprisoned nobles and chiefs should be
    bartered at the rate of 500 Christian slaves for each one of the
    chiefs and nobles, and the balance of the captives for Prince
    Asin and the clergy. [192]


It is not therefore surprising to hear of the extraordinarily
revengeful activity which the Sulus exhibited during the period of
humiliation to which their sultan and nobles were subjected in Manila.

Bantilan was a man of strong personality, a warrior, and a leader. The
expeditions which he organized against his enemies were unusually
strong and left havoc everywhere. The towns he pillaged and the
captives he carried away alarmed the Spanish Government to a high
degree. A high council of war was convened in Manila in 1752, which
declared for an unmerciful campaign and a war of extermination to
be conducted with the utmost conceivable cruelty. Volunteers and
Bisayan corsairs were called to aid the regular troops. Unlimited
authority was granted them to annihilate the foe, burn his villages,
destroy his crops, and desolate his lands. The corsairs were exempted
from all taxes. They were allowed to keep or sell all female captives
and all males under 12 and over 30 years of age. Old men and crippled
persons were to be killed. Male captives between 12 and 30 years of
age were to be turned in to the government; the captors to receive
in compensation from P4 to P6 per man. Nursing children were ordered
to be baptized. At first the corsairs were required to turn in to
the government one-fifth of all valuables looted, but this was soon
afterwards revoked and all corsairs who equipped themselves retained
all their booty.

As part of the general campaign, Field Marshal Abad made another attack
on Jolo with a force amounting to 1,900 men. The fleet cannonaded
the forts for seventy-two continuous hours. A division of the troops
landed and engaged the Sulus, but after suffering considerable loss
retreated disastrously.

The raids of the Spaniards and Bisayans helped to increase the
vigilance of the Sulus and excited them to extreme cruelty and an
abnormal degree of revenge. [193]


    The year 1753 is stated to have been the bloodiest in the history
    of Moro piracy. No part of the Bisayas escaped ravaging in this
    year, while the Camarines, Batangas, and Albay suffered equally
    with the rest. The conduct of the pirates was more than ordinarily
    cruel. Priests were slain, towns wholly destroyed, and thousands
    of captives carried south into Moro slavery. The condition of the
    Islands at the end of this year was probably the most deplorable
    in their history. [194]


In the meantime Prince Asin died of grief in his prison.

Early in 1753 Alimud Din petitioned the governor to allow Princess
Fatimah to go to Jolo for the purpose of arranging a peace with
Bantilan. This request was granted on condition that she deliver
50 slaves to the Spanish Government on her arrival at Jolo. This
she complied with faithfully, adding one Spanish captive to the 50
Christian slaves wanted. Her mission was apparently successful and she
returned to Manila with Datu Mohammed Ismael and Datu Maharaja-Layla,
a commission sent by Bantilan. They brought a letter from Bantilan,
which was transmitted to the governor by Alimud Din together with
a draft of a treaty for the restoration of peace between Spain and
Sulu. Bantilan expressed deep regret for Alimud Din and the existing
condition of hostility and gave strong assurance of his desire for
the return of the sultan and the reëstablishment of peace with Spain.

The governor acceded to the petition of the sultan and sent a letter
to Bantilan with the commission, requesting that all hostilities stop
for the period of one year pending the consideration and completion
of the new treaty. In 1754 Governor Arandia assumed command and
approved of the proposed treaty. To expedite matters he sent the
commanding officer of the southern forces to find out what had been
done by Bantilan toward the fulfilment of the conditions agreed
upon. Bantilan met the commanding officer in a most friendly manner
and discussed the questions frankly and ably. He explained in clear
and impressive manner the principal causes of hostility and strongly
blamed the governor of Zamboanga for his unjust imprisonment of the
sultan and Datu Asin and his unbearable treatment of the messengers
and representatives of the Sulu authorities. He declared his wish
and true desire for peace and delivered to the commanding officer 68
Christian captives and two Spanish sloops. The officer was strongly
impressed with the integrity of Bantilan and with the honesty of his
intentions, and gave to the governor a very favorable report of both
Alimud Din and Bantilan. He assured him that the sultan was not a
traitor at all, but a man of good intentions, who was simply unable
to carry out some of his plans and promises because of the determined
resistance of many of the principal datus.

A general council was held in Manila early in 1755, in which it was
resolved to set the sultan free and return him to Jolo if the Sulu
authorities carried out the terms of the following conditions:

1. That all captives within the sultanate of Sulu be delivered within
one year.

2. That all valuable property and ornaments looted from the churches
be returned within one year.

General Zacharias who had attended the council set out from Manila in
September to take charge of the government of Mindanao. He brought back
to Jolo 6 princes, 5 princesses, 20 women, and 130 men of the sultan's
retinue. He had letters from Alimud Din and the Governor-General to
Bantilan and was authorized to conduct the preliminaries of a peace
treaty. Other ambassadors who accompanied Zacharias were empowered
to ratify the same. The ships arrived at Jolo on October 4, and the
ambassadors were well received by Bantilan. The latter agreed to all
the conditions imposed in as far as it was in his power to carry them
out. But he stated that many captives were bought from Mindanao chiefs
and were owned by datus on Basilan and other inaccessible places, who
were unwilling to give them up unless they were justly compensated. He
added that many such datus were in alliance with datus in Mindanao
and were planning to attack Zamboanga, and that the time was very
inopportune for him to force them to deliver all captives.

The terms were actually impossible of execution and the endeavor to
make the treaty and ratify it proved fruitless.

Alimud Din remained in prison until 1763, when the English, after their
conquest and occupation of Manila, reinstated him on the throne of
Sulu. During the period of his imprisonment he felt greatly humiliated,
but lived as a Christian and with one wife only. At the death of his
wife, in 1755, he was allowed to marry a Sulu woman who had been his
concubine, but who had professed Christianity and was living at the
College of Santa Potenciana.

The Sulus received their former sultan with a good heart and Alimud
Din resumed his former authority as Sultan of Sulu. The people had
evidently acquired strong sympathy for him and Bantilan had either
undergone a change of heart or felt convinced that it was of no avail
to go against such strong popular sentiment and fight the English
forces. Withdrawing from Jolo he moved to Kuta Gubang near Parang,
where, a few years later, he died.

In return for the favors which he received from the English, Alimud Din
ceded to them that part of North Borneo lying between Cape Inarstang
and the River Frimanis with the adjacent Island of Balambangan and
the Island of Tulayan. Balambangan was soon after that occupied and
garrisoned by English forces.

In the later days of his reign, Alimud Din was addressed as Amirul
Mu'minin (The Prince of the Faithful) by which name he is better known
to the Sulus. Moro incursions increased at that time and the Sulus
became so daring as to invade the Bay of Manila in 1769, carry away
captives from the wharves of the city, and appear at the Plaza del
Palacio at retreat before they were repulsed or even detected. Becoming
old and weak, Amirul Mu'minin abdicated the sultanate in favor of
his son Israel, in November, 1773.


REIGN OF SULTAN ISRAEL

Sultan Israel followed the same progressive policy which characterized
his father's administration. However, his succession was contested
by rivals, and the people were not unanimous in his support. In
his foreign relations with the English and Spaniards he was at the
beginning uncertain as to the side toward which to lean. Both powers
had an eye on Sulu and appeared interested in its affairs. However,
before long he refused the request of the English to be allowed to move
their factory from Balambangan to Tandu-dayang, in the neighborhood
of Jolo, and exchanged messages of friendship with King Carlos III,
who congratulated Israel on his succession to the sultanate and thanked
him for his action relative to the removal of the Balambangan factory
to Sulu Island. [195] The early education Israel received in Manila,
together with the consideration with which the Spanish authorities
treated him at that time, helped to win his sympathies to the Spanish
side and to form a sort of an alliance between Sulu and Spain against
Great Britain. Such an alliance was further needed to strengthen his
hand in Sulu, for the purpose of checking any insurrection that might
be fomented by rival datus or unfriendly chiefs. The Spaniards promised
to help him in his endeavors to organize an army and a navy; and, he on
his part, agreed to open the ports of Sulu for free commerce with the
Philippine Islands. He further asked the Spanish Government for capital
to work his mines, promising to pay back one-fifth of the output.

In 1774 and 1776, Jolo was visited by Captain Thomas Forrest, who in
his "Voyage to New Guinea" described the town and country as he saw
them. His account is so interesting and so clear that the following
extracts [196] are quoted therefrom:


    They have a great variety of fine tropical fruits; the oranges
    are fully as good as those of China. They have also a variety
    of the fruit called jack, or nangka, durians, a kind of large
    custard apple named madang, mangos, mangustines * * *. The Sulus
    having great connection with China, and many Chineses being
    settled amongst them, they have learned the art of ingrafting
    and improving their fruits * * *.

    The capital town is called Bawang, [197] situated by the seacoast,
    on the northwest part of the island, and containing about 6,000
    inhabitants. Many of them were Ilanun * * *.

    This island * * * is well cultivated, affording a fine prospect
    from the sea, on every side far superior to that of Malay countries
    in general * * *.

    Here are wild elephants, the offspring, doubtless, of those sent
    in former days, from the continent of India [198] as presents to
    the kings of Sulu. Those animals avoid meeting with horned cattle,
    though they are not shy of horses. After harvest the Sulus hunt
    the elephants and wild hog, endeavoring to destroy them * * *.
    Sulu has spotted deer, abundance of goats, and black cattle.

    The pearl fishery * * * proves also to the Sulus the cause of
    their consequence amongst their neighbors, as being a nursery
    for seamen, ready to man a fleet of praus upon an emergency * * *.
    The praus [boats] of the Sulus are very neatly built, from 6 to
    40 tons burden, sail well, and are all fitted with the tripod
    mast. [199] * * *

    The arts are in greater forwardness here than at Mindanao. * * *
    In the common market is also a copper currency, a convenience much
    wanted at Mindanao, where, as has been said, the market currency
    is rice.

    The Sulus have in their families many Bisayan, some Spanish
    slaves, whom they purchase from the Ilanun and Magindanao
    cruisers. Sometimes they purchase whole cargoes, which they carry
    to Passir, on Borneo, where, if the females are handsome, they
    are bought up for the Batavia market. The masters sometimes use
    their slaves cruelly, assuming the power of life and death over
    them. Many are put to death for trifling offenses, and their bodies
    left above the ground. An attempt of elopement is here seldom
    pardoned, or indeed at Magindanao. Yet, the distance being so
    small from either Sulu or Slangan, [200] to the Spanish settlement,
    I have wondered how any stay, as they are not closely confined.

    The Bisayan slaves play often on the violin, and the Sulus are
    fond of European music. [201] I have seen the Sultan Israel, who
    was educated in Manila, and his niece, * * * dance a tolerable
    minuet. I have also seen the datus go down a country dance,
    but as they wore heavy slippers, they did it clumsily.

    The Sulus are not only neat in their clothes, but dress gaily. The
    men go generally in white waistcoats, buttoned down to the wrist;
    with white breeches, sometimes strait, sometimes wide. * * *
    Both sexes are fond of gaming. * * *

    In the cool of the evening, I had the pleasure of seeing the
    Sultan's niece and another princess. They wore waistcoats of
    fine muslin close fitted to their bodies; their necks to the
    upper part of the breasts being bare. From the waist downward
    they wore a loose robe, girt with an embroidered zone or belt
    about the middle, with a large clasp of gold, and a precious
    stone. This loose robe like a petticoat came over their drawers,
    and reached to the middle of the leg; the drawers of fine muslin
    reaching to the ankle. They rode across with very short stirrups,
    and wore their hair clubbed atop, Chinese fashion. They often
    put sweet oils on their hair which give it a gloss. The ladies
    sat their horses remarkably well; and this is an exercise women
    of fashion indulge all over the island.

    "The Island Sulu is far from being large; but its situation
    between Mindanao and Borneo makes it the mart of all the Moorish
    kingdoms. I do not find that the Portuguese ever pretended to
    settle, much less to conquer these islands; but they visited them
    frequently for the sake of trade; and in those days, there was
    greater commerce in these parts than can well be imagined. For,
    while the trade was open to Japan, there came from thence two or
    three ships laden with silver, amber, silks, chests, cabinets,
    and other curiosities made of sweet-scented woods, with vast
    quantities of silks, quilts, and earthenware, from China. For
    these the merchants of Golconda exchanged their diamonds, those
    of Ceylon their rubies, topazes, and sapphires; from Java and
    Sumatra came pepper, and spices from the Moluccas." (Harris'
    History of the Portuguese Empire, p. 685.)

    About fifteen datus * * * make the greater part of the
    legislature. * * * They sit in council with the Sultan. The
    sultan has two votes in this assembly, and each datu has one. The
    heir apparent, * * * if he side with the sultan, has two votes;
    but, if against him, only one. There are two representatives of
    the people, called mantiris, like the military tribunes of the
    Romans. The common people of Sulu * * * enjoy much real freedom,
    owing to the above representation.

    The state of Sulu is small, * * * containing scarce above 60,000
    inhabitants; yet are these powerful, and have under them, not only
    most of the islands that compose that Archipelago, but a great part
    of Borneo, some of which they have granted to the English. They
    have the character of being treacherous, and of endeavoring always
    to supply by fraud what they can not effect by force. * * *

    Only seven years have elapsed since the Sultan of Kulan * *
     * on the northeast of Borneo, was at war with the Sultan of
    Buru, on the same coast. One of them applied to the Sulus for
    assistance. The datus Alimud Din and Nukila went; and watching
    their opportunity, attacked both the sultans, plundered them,
    and carried them with their wives, children, and many of their
    headmen to Sulu. They were sometime after sent back, on condition
    that they should become tributary, which they are at this day.


The intentions of the East India Company in fortifying Balambangan
were regarded with suspicion by the Spaniards, who employed every
method possible to incite hostilities between the Sulus and the
English. The English agents at Jolo won the sympathy of a party
headed by the strong datus in chief command of the Sulu forces. The
Spaniards had the sultan and his party on their side. This question
of national policy was a matter of serious and important concern to
the people. It stirred up the whole Sulu community, and party issues
were ardently and publicly discussed.

The jealousy which the English and Spaniards exhibited toward
each other and the methods they used to secure alliance with Sulu,
had the effect of exciting the suspicion of the Sulus toward both
nations. Besides that, the Spanish officials at Zamboanga showed
exceedingly poor judgment, and their action aroused the indignation
of all parties in Sulu, and led to the renewal of hostilities.

In 1773 a majority of the leading datus favored an alliance with
England against Spain. In 1775 the English party weakened and the
garrison of Balambangan was treacherously attacked and destroyed
by Sulu agents and forces secretly sent there by Sultan Israel and
his council. The conduct of the Sulus in this incident depicts very
clearly a marked trait of the Sulu character. A full description
of this incident is given herewith in the words of Captain Forrest,
who had an intimate knowledge of the conditions at Balambangan and
the causes leading to the massacre.


    When John Herbert, esq. went to Balambangan early in the preceding
    year [1774], he found great want of buildings to accommodate the
    company's servants, civil and military; those gentlemen who had
    just been saved from the shipwreck of the Royal Captain on the
    shoals of Palawan, as well as the crew of that ship. About this
    time, one Tating, a Sulu datu, and first cousin to Sultan Israel,
    came with many of his vassals to Balambangan, offered his service
    as a builder, was employed by Mr. Herbert, and, in the whole of his
    behavior, gave satisfaction. The datu, falling sick, went home to
    Sulu for the recovery of his health. This blessing soon obtained,
    he returned to the prosecution of his task at Balambangan.

    He now brought from the sultan and council letters recommending
    him as a trustworthy person, to erect whatever warehouses or
    buildings might be wanted. With him came two other datus, Muluk
    and Nukila. But Datu Tating took care to show only part of his
    numerous followers, concealing the rest in the Island of Banguey,
    and even in some recesses of Balambangan, which, being covered
    with wood, as those islands generally are, there was no great
    fear of discovery.

    Surmises, however, had some days begun to spread reports of a
    plot, while Tating proceeded with such address, that the chief
    and council, who were not without their suspicions, apprehended
    no danger very nigh.

    During the night strict watch was kept all over the settlement. At
    dawn, the gun, as usual, announced the morning, and for a few
    moments tranquillity reigned. A house at some small distance
    suddenly fired proved the signal to the Sulus. They rushed into
    the fort, killed the sentries, and turned the guns against the
    Bugis guard. The few settlers, lately rendered fewer by death, were
    fain to make their escape in what vessels they could find. [202]


The governor and five others escaped on board a vessel, leaving behind
a great quantity of arms and wealth. The English factors who were
at Jolo fled in a Chinese junk. In the same year Tating attempted a
similar attack on Zamboanga, but failed. During 1776 and 1777 he and
other Sulus harassed the Bisayas and ravaged the coast of Cebu.


MORO PIRATES

Sultan Israel was poisoned in 1778 by his cousin Alimud Din II,
the son of Bantilan. During the reign of Sultan Alimud Din II,
hostilities between Sulus and Spaniards increased, and for the period
of ten years or more traffic between Luzon and the southern islands
was paralyzed. About 500 Spanish and native Christians were every
year carried into captivity by the Moros. The government was greatly
exercised over this grave situation, and in 1789 the Captain-General
Mariquina reported to the King that "war with the Moros was an evil
without remedy."

In the latter part of 1789 Sharapud Din, the son of Alimud Din I,
ascended the throne of Sulu. While a youth he was imprisoned with
his father in Zamboanga and accompanied the latter to Manila. Very
little is known of his reign except that he was animated by the same
spirit and principles which characterized his father's reign and that
of his brother Israel. He coined money, and one of his coins which
was obtained from Jolo bears the date 1204 A. H., which was probably
the date of his succession. Sultan Sharapud Din was followed by his
sons Alimud Din III and Aliyud Din I.


    The continued presence of the Moros in Mindoro, where they haunted
    the bays and rivers of both east and west coasts for months at a
    time, stealing out from this island for attack in every direction,
    was specially noted by Padre Zuñiga, and indicated how feebly
    the Spaniards repulsed these pirates a hundred years ago.

    It was the last severe phase of Malay piracy, when even the
    strong merchant ships of England and America dreaded the Straits
    of Borneo and passed with caution through the China Sea. Northern
    Borneo, the Sulu Archipelago, and the southern coasts of Mindanao
    were the centers from which came these fierce sea wolves, whose
    cruel exploits have left their many traditions in the American
    and British merchant navies, just as they periodically appear in
    the chronicles of the Philippines.

    Five hundred captives annually seem to have been the spoils taken
    by these Moros in the Philippine Islands, and as far south as
    Batavia and Macassar captive Filipinos were sold in the slave
    marts of the Malays. The aged and infirm were inhumanly bartered
    to the savage tribes of Borneo, who offered them up in their
    ceremonial sacrifices. The measures of the Spanish Government,
    though constant and expensive, were ineffective. Between 1778 and
    1793 a million and a half of pesos were expended on the fleets
    and expeditions to drive back or punish the Moros, but at the
    end of the century a veritable climax of piracy was attained.

    Pirates swarmed continually about the coasts of Mindoro,
    Burias, and Masbate, and even frequented the esteros [203] of
    Manila Bay. Some sort of peace seems to have been established
    with Jolo and a friendly commerce was engaged in toward the
    end of the century, but the Moros of Mindanao and Borneo were
    increasing enemies. In 1798 a fleet of 25 Moro bancas passed up
    the Pacific coast of Luzon and fell upon the isolated towns of
    Baler, Kasiguran, and Palanan, destroying the pueblos and taking
    450 captives. The cura of Kasiguran was ransomed in Binangonan
    for the sum of 2,500 pesos. For four years this pirate fleet had
    its rendezvous on Burias, whence it raided the adjacent coasts
    and Katanduan Island. [204]


Governor Aguilar assumed command in 1793 and made every effort to
remedy this condition of affairs. He divided the Archipelago into six
divisions, each of which was provided with a fleet of six gunboats. He
repaired the forts of the Bisayas, Mindoro, Tayabas, Batangas, and
Zamboanga. While preparing for defence, he negotiated with the Sulu
and Mindanao Moros for peace and partially succeeded in establishing
a condition of truce with Sulu.

In 1798 he convened a council to consider further measures for the
suppression of piracy. All records pertaining to Moro affairs were
submitted to Rufino Suarez, "Asesor del Gobierno," who was directed
to report on this subject. The report was rendered in April, 1800,
and contained full information and recommendations as to the best
measures and methods that the government could undertake for that
purpose. Aguilar, however, did not act on the recommendations of
Suarez, but continued his negotiations with the Moros who became
peaceful and remained so until 1803. In this year the English attacked
Zamboanga unsuccessfully, instigated hostility between Sulu and Spain,
and reoccupied the Island of Balambangan, which they held for three
years only.

In 1805 a treaty was made between Sulu and Spain whereby it was agreed
that no foreign resident would be permitted in Sulu without the
consent of the Spanish Government, and that in case of war between
Spain and any foreign country, the Sultan's ports would be closed
against Spain's enemies. Between 1805 and 1815 detailed accounts of
piratical raids are infrequent.

Sultan Aliyud Din died in 1808 and was succeeded by his pious brother
Shakirul Lah. It is related that Shakirul Lah slept on boards and
covered himself with sarongs only. He used to leave his home at night,
search for the poor and needy and feed them.

In 1815, the raiders took 1,000 native prisoners and captured several
Spanish, British, and Dutch vessels. In October, 1818, a Spanish fleet
under Pedro Esteban encountered 25 Moro vessels in the vicinity of
Albay, seized nine of them and sank the rest.

Sultan Shakirul Lah was succeeded in 1823 by Sultan Jamalul Kiram
I, the son of Alimud Din III. In the same year, Governor Antonio
Martinez, impressed by the superior policy and success of Corcuera,
organized an expedition under Alonso Morgado and attacked the pirates
in their home lairs, at Basilan, Pilas, Sulu, and Mindanao. The Spanish
fleet consisted of 2 schooners, 4 gunboats, 6 tenders, 2 junks, and
1 transport schooner. The expedition reached Pilas in March, 1825,
took the fort by assault and killed 50 Moros. At Jolo it cannonaded
the town for ten hours and then left for Mindanao, where it inflicted
considerable damage. It destroyed Moro boats at Illana Bay, Pollok,
and Dumankilis Bay.

General Ricafort sent another expedition, in 1827, to Jolo, consisting
of 20 vessels and 500 troops; but Jolo was so well fortified and the
Moro forces so numerous that the Spanish soldiers could not disembark,
and the expedition returned without accomplishing any results.

The seal of Sultan Jamalul Kiram I bears the date 1239 A. H., or
about 1823 A. D., which in all probability indicates the year of his
succession. He issued regular appointment forms for his subordinate
officers of state and dated his communications, using the current
Malay and Mohammedan dates combined. In the estimation of the Sulus
he was a strong and very prosperous sultan.

On the 23d of September, 1836 A. D. or 1252 A. H., he signed a
commercial treaty with Capt. José M. Halcon as the representative of
Captain-General Salazar. [205] The principal part of the treaty was
an agreement regulating boat licenses and the duties to be paid by
Sulu boats in Manila and Zamboanga and by Spanish vessels in Jolo. In
another document bearing the same date and signed by the same parties,
an alliance was declared guaranteeing general peace and safety to
Sulu boats in Philippine waters and to Spanish and Filipino craft in
the Sulu Sea. The sultan further consented to have a Spanish trading
house constructed at Jolo for the safe storage of merchandise under
the charge of a Spanish resident agent.


TREATY OF 1836 WITH THE SULTAN OF SULU


TEXT OF THE TREATY

Articles of agreement arranging the duties to be paid by Sulu craft
in Manila and Zamboanga, and by Spanish craft in Jolo, which schedule
can not be changed except by a new agreement.

Article 1. Sulu craft which, with proper license, go to Manila, may
import products of the Islands subject to the Sultan, by paying a
consumption duty of 2 1/2%.

Article 2. Wax and cacao may be deposited in the Manila Custom-House
by paying 1%; but if these articles are imported the established 14%
will be paid.

Article 3. Sulu craft that trade in Zamboanga will pay a duty of 1%
on products of the islands subject to the Sultan.

Article 4. All these duties will be paid in silver to the Protecting
Spanish Government on the basis of one-half the appraised value.

Article 5. Spanish craft in Jolo will pay the following duties in kind:


                                                                Pesos
Ships of three masts from Manila, with Chinese passengers       2,000
The same, without passengers                                    1,800
Brigantine from Manila, with Chinese passengers                 1,500
The same, without passengers                                    1,300
Schooner from Manila, with Chinese passengers                   1,400
The same, without passengers                                    1,200
Pontin (small trading boat) from Manila, with Chinese
    passengers                                                  1,400
The same, without passengers                                    1,200
Galley from Manila or other ports of the Philippines, with
    cargo of rice (palay), sugar and saguranes [206]              300
The same for the Philippine Islands with cargo of merchandise     500


Article 6. These duties fixed for Spanish craft will be paid in kind
in accordance with the values laid down in the following schedule,
one-half of which will be selected by the Sultan's government officials
from the cargo and the other half shall consist of such articles as
the captain of the boat may select, valuation to be  in accordance
with the schedule. Articles not in the schedule can not be exacted
from the captain, nor will he give such payment:


    =================================================================
    |               Articles               |   Quantity   |  Value  |
    |                                      |              | (pesos) |
    |======================================+==============+=========|
    | Rice                                 | One laga     |    2.00 |
    | Sugar                                | One pilon    |    5.00 |
    | Coconut oil                          | One tinaja   |    6.50 |
    | Chapas (plates)                      | Per thousand |    1.00 |
    | Cambayas ordinarias (cloth)          | Per thousand |    9.00 |
    | Carancali (cloth)                    | Per piece    |   11.00 |
    | Coco, black and blue, (cloth)        | 11 yards     |    4.50 |
    | Coquillo blanco, (cloth), 6 brazas   |              |         |
    |   (12 yards)                         | 1 piece      |    6.50 |
    | Coco blanco, (cloth), 22 brazas      |              |         |
    |   (44 yards)                         | 1 piece      |   16.50 |
    | Javal de caranclan (cloth)           | 1 piece      |   26.00 |
    | Cacha (cloth)                        | 1 piece      |    4.00 |
    | Manta coleta (shirting)              | 1 piece      |    1.00 |
    | Plain muslin, 12 varas               | 1 piece      |   10.00 |
    | Fancy muslin                         | 1 piece      |    5.00 |
    | Colored muslin, 12 varas             | 1 piece      |   15.00 |
    | Unhusked rice                        | One laga     |    1.00 |
    | Paños de Costa (cloth)               | 1 piece      |   11.00 |
    | Ordinary cambric kerchiefs           | 1 kerchief   |     .50 |
    | Ordinary stamped kerchiefs           | Per dozen    |    3.00 |
    | Woolens                              | 1 piece      |    6.00 |
    | Common woolens                       | 1 piece      |    5.00 |
    | Printed cotton with flowers          | 1 piece      |    9.00 |
    =================================================================


Article 7. Sulu ships found trading in ports without a license or
passing contraband will be treated as smugglers in accordance with the
Spanish laws laid down for such. Spanish schooners and small trading
craft (galeras) that show by manifest in Jolo that they carry a cargo
of Philippine produce, and are afterward discovered to have, in place
thereof, a cargo of merchandise (géneros), and to have discharged
such cargo in the port to be sold therein, will be fined 500 pesos as
per values in Jolo, two-thirds of said sum to go to the Sultan, and
one-third to the Royal Treasury of the Protecting Spanish Government.

Article 8. Should the import duties on any articles of commerce
produced in the Sulu Islands be reduced in Manila or Zamboanga to
a lower rate than that now established, the Spanish Government will
also make a reduction so that Sulu ships may always pay less, as has
been agreed.

Should the Sultan of Sulu collect smaller duties from any foreign
ship than those established for Spaniards, either as a tax or by
a reduction of the valuation of the dutiable articles, he will be
obliged to make such a reduction in duties for Spanish craft as will
give the advantage to the flag of His Catholic Majesty as stipulated.

Last Article. Should the text of these articles of agreement differ
in the two languages, the Spanish text will be literally adhered to.

Palace of Jolo, September 23, 1836, which is the 14th of the moon
Jamadul Akir, 1252.--José M. Harun,--Rubric,--Sultan Mohammed
Jamalul Kiram,--Datu Mohammed Harun,--Datu Mohammed Buyuk,--Datu
Bandahala,--Datu Muluk,--Datu Sabalmar,--Datu Mamancha,--Datu
Juhan,--Datu Maharaja-Layla,--Datu Sabuwayan,--Datu Muluk Kahar,--Datu
Nay.

I, Don José María Halcon y Mendoza, Frigate Captain of the Royal Navy,
etc., Special Commissioner appointed by the Captain General of the
Philippines to establish these articles of agreement (capitulaciones),

Certify that when I received from the hands of the Sultan of Sulu the
copy herewith, in the act of the exchange, by which I handed him the
duplicate with the ratification of the Governor General, I remarked
at the end of the present a writing in Malay, on the page following
that of the seals and signatures which is the reverse of folio six,
on which it can be seen.

I also certify that having examined the contents of said improper
addition which, although unauthorized, appears in writing in the
present document, it was found to be the text of the circular of the
Sultan to his people, in four articles, whose translation, made by
the Datu Muluk-Bandarasa, and verified separately by several persons,
reads as follows:

Article 1. The people of Sulu who wish to go to Zamboanga or Mindanao
shall ask the Sultan of Sulu for a passport so that they may suffer
no harm if they meet ships belonging to the Navy.

Article 2. Passports shall be issued stating the number of people on
board and the cargo when requested.

Article 3. I give this order for the safety of those who travel by
sea, as instead of being pursued by the ships of the Navy, they shall
be helped.

Article 4. I give you the present patent so that when you meet the
ships of the Navy of the King of Spain, my brother, they may not harm,
but help you.

And in proof thereof, I make out the present certificate, written
of my hand and attached to the Articles of Agreement, of which it is
impossible to make a new copy, on account of the absence of some of
the Datus who were present when they were agreed to, and approved them.

Given on board her Majesty's schooner "Tirol" in the roadstead of
Jolo on the 29th of March 1837.


José Ma. Halcon, (His flourish).


RATIFICATION OF THE TREATY OF 1836 BY THE QUEEN REGENT OF SPAIN

Isabel II, Queen of Spain, by the Grace of God and the Constitution of
the Spanish Monarchy, and in her Royal name and during her minority,
the Queen Dowager her mother, Doña María Cristina of Bourbon, Regent
of the Kingdom:

Whereas on the twenty-third of September of last year, at the palace
of Jolo, a treaty of peace, protection and commerce having been drawn
up, concluded and signed by the frigate-captain of the national fleet,
Don José María Halcon, commander in chief of the naval forces anchored
in the roadstead of Jolo, representing the Captain General of the
Philippine Islands, and the Sultan Jamalul Kiram and Datus; which
said treaty, composed of six articles, word by word, is as follows:

Capitulations of Peace, Protection and Commerce, executed to the
most Excellent Sultan and Datus of Sulu, by his high Excellency the
Captain-General, Governor of the Philippine Islands, in the name of
the high and powerful Sovereignty of her Catholic Majesty, being drawn
up and agreed to by both parties, to wit: representing the Spanish
Government as plenipotentiary of his high Excellency the Captain
General, Don Pedro Antonio Salazar, Governor of the Philippines, the
frigate-captain of the royal fleet, Don José María Halcon, commander
in chief of the naval forces anchored in the roadstead of Jolo; and
upon the other part, the Sultan Jamalul Kiram, Raja of Sulu and Datus
who subscribe, which parties enacted as follows:


    Article 1

    His high Excellency the Captain-General, Governor, for her Catholic
    Majesty, of the Philippine Islands, assures the most excellent
    Sultan and Datus of Sulu, for the present and forever, of the most
    stable peace between the Spaniards and natives of all the islands
    subject to the Crown of Spain and the tributaries of the lands
    governed by the Sultan and Datus. He offers the protection of his
    Government and the aid of fleets and soldiers for the wars which
    the Sultan shall find necessary to wage against enemies who shall
    attack him, or in order to accomplish the subjection of the peoples
    who rebel in all the confines of the islands which are found
    within Spanish jurisdiction, and which extend from the western
    point of Mindanao as far as Borneo and Palawan, except Sandakan
    and the other lands tributary to the Sultan on the coast of Borneo.

    The Sultan of Sulu, upon his part, accepting the friendship of
    the Spanish Government, binds himself to keep peace with all the
    vassals of her Catholic Majesty, and further binds himself to
    consider as his enemies those who hereafter may be such to the
    Spanish nation, the Sulus proceeding with armed men to the wars
    which may arise, in the same manner as if they were Spaniards; in
    case of his furnishing such aid, the provisions for the support
    of the Sulus shall be supplied by the Royal exchequer of her
    Catholic Majesty, as they are for the other soldiers and people
    of her army and navy.

    The sense of the second clause of the Capitulations of one thousand
    seven hundred and thirty-seven, that they are not bound to furnish
    assistance for wars against European nations, is hereby renewed
    and affirmed.


    Article 2

    In accordance with the friendship and protection which unite
    Sulu with the Spanish provinces of the Philippines, the Sulu
    boats shall navigate and trade freely with the open ports of
    Manila and Zamboanga, and the Spanish vessels with Jolo, where
    not only will both be well received, but shall find protection
    and the same treatment as the natives.

    In a separate Capitulation are determined the duties which the
    Spanish vessels shall pay in Jolo, and those which the Sulus
    shall pay in Manila and Zamboanga; but by these Capitulations it
    is agreed that whenever the Sulus convey cargoes of products of
    the islands, they shall pay in Manila and Zamboanga less than
    foreign vessels, and the Spanish vessels shall not pay in Jolo
    as much as is charged the ships of other nations.


    Article 3

    In order that the traffic of Spanish vessels in Jolo shall not
    suffer the injuries and delays occasioned by the difficulties of
    their market, the Sultan and Datus consent to the construction of a
    factory or trading house, with safe warehouses, where merchandise
    may be stored without risk: and the Sultan and Datus agree always
    to respect this place, in which there will be a resident Spanish
    agent, who shall assume charge of all the business entrusted
    to him. If the Sulus should desire to do likewise in Manila,
    they shall be permitted; but the Spanish Government receives
    for storage merchandise from the Custom-house of that city upon
    payment of fees of but one per centum.

    The Sultan shall designate the proper place for the location
    of the warehouses, which shall be convenient for loading and
    unloading and the Government shall request the Sultan to furnish,
    and shall pay for, the materials and workmen that may be necessary.


    Article 4

    In order that the Spanish and Sulu vessels may navigate and trade
    with safety, free from the piracies of the Hanuns and Samals
    the Spanish Government will strengthen its fleets in Mindanao
    waters, which same will protect equally those of both nations;
    and in order that good may not be confused with evil persons,
    the following rules shall be observed:

    1st. All Spanish vessels arriving at Jolo shall show to the Sultan
    their permit upon anchoring, and the same shall be sealed upon
    sailing; without which the captain shall be punished at Manila.

    2d. All Sulu vessels which proceed to Manila or Zamboanga, shall
    carry the permit of the Sultan, and in possession of the same
    shall be free and unmolested.

    3d. All Spanish or Sulu vessels which shall proceed for trading
    to Mindanao, shall go first to Zamboanga to notify the Governor,
    who shall sign their permit without cost.

    4th. Every Spanish or Sulu vessel which shall be found by the
    fleets of Illana or Sindangan bays, without permit of the Governor
    and Sultan as aforesaid, shall be seized and shall lose all her
    merchandise, of which two-thirds shall be awarded to those making
    the capture and one-third to the Sultan of Sulu, if the vessel
    is Sulu, and to the Spanish Government if the vessel is Spanish.

    5th. The Governor of Zamboanga shall determine the procedure in
    the case of vintas [small sail boats] of the towns of Pilas and
    Basilan Islands friendly to said Plaza [Zamboanga].

    6th. Sulu merchant vessels proceeding outside the islands of the
    Sultan or to Mindanao with a permit, should not flee from the
    fleets which they encounter, because the latter are intended to
    defend them and run down evil-doers. Commanders of the fleets
    shall be ordered to receive and aid the advice-boats of the Sultan.


    Article 5

    The Sultan and Datus of Sulu pledge themselves to prevent the
    piracies of the Ilanuns and Samals in the Philippines, and if they
    are unable, the Sultan shall so report in order that the Spanish
    Government may afford assistance or undertake the task alone.


    Last Article

    If the sense of these Capitulations is not conformable in both
    languages, the same shall agree with the literal Spanish text.

    Palace of Jolo, September 23, 1836, which is the fourteenth of the
    moon Jamadul Akir of one thousand two hundred and fifty-two. The
    seals.--Sultan Mohammed Jamalul Kiram.--Seal--signed.--José
    María Halcon.--Datu Mohammed Harun.--Seal.--Datu Mohammed
    Buyuk.--Seal--Datu Bandahala.--Seal--Datu Amilbahar.--Datu
    Muluk.--Datu Sabalmar.--Datu Mamancha.--Datu Juhan.--Datu
    Maharajah-Layla.--Datu Sabuwayan.--Datu Muluk Kahar.--Datu Nay.

    Therefore, the Government of our August Daughter, having been duly
    authorized by the decree of the Cortes of the thirteenth of the
    present month, for the ratification of the inclosed treaty, and
    the same having been seen and examined by Us, we have approved and
    ratified and by these presents do hereby approve and ratify the
    contents thereof as a whole, in the best and most complete form
    possible, promising on the faith and the word of Queen Regent,
    in the name of our August Daughter, to comply with and observe
    the same, and compel wholly the compliance with and observance
    of the same. In witness whereof, we command the disposition of
    the same, signed with our hand, and sealed with our own private
    seal by the First Secretary of State. Done at Madrid, this October
    twenty-ninth, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-seven.


    I the Queen Regent.

    [A shield in wax.]

    Eusebio de Bandaxi y Azara.


EXPEDITION OF GOVERNOR CLAVERIA

In 1842 the Spanish Government built the stone fort at Isabela de
Basilan. The Balangingi and Basilan Moros appear about this time to
have become a menace to the peace and to the commerce of nations. To
punish Datu Usak of Malusu for depredations committed against French
vessels, Basilan was blockaded by a French fleet in 1843. Aspiring
for Chinese trade and for the possession of a port in the neighboring
seas the French in 1844 concluded a treaty with the Sultan of Sulu
for the cession of the Island of Basilan for a considerable sum of
money. The terms of this treaty do not appear to have been carried
out, but this act and the frequent appearance of English, Dutch,
and French vessels in Sulu waters aroused the Spaniards to active
measures for the subjugation of the Sulu Archipelago.

This year Jamalul Kiram I died, and his son Mohammed Pulalun succeeded
to the sultanate. The "Luntar" or "Sulu Annals" begin January, 1844,
and appear to have been started by Sultan Pulalun.

In 1845 a frigate attacked the Island of Balangingi, but it was
repulsed and gained no advantage except that of ascertaining the
strength of the enemy. The shores of Basilan and the principal
islands lying between it and the Island of Sulu had numerous forts,
the strongest of which were on the island of Balangingi, the chief
stronghold and headquarters of the Samal pirates. Realizing the
seriousness of the situation Governor Claveria took the matter in
hand and with energy and enthusiasm made every effort to strengthen
the fleet and increase its efficiency.

In 1848 he secured three steam war vessels called Elcano, Magallanes,
and Reina de Castilla which were built by the English and were the
first steam gunboats the Philippine Government ever employed. Steam
was certainly destined to mark a new epoch, one which saw the beginning
of the end of Moro piracy.

With two additional pilot boats and three transport brigs the
expedition, headed by Governor Claveria in person, left Manila in
January and, coming by the way of Dapitan, reunited at Caldera Bay,
where it received additional troops from Zamboanga.

The Island of Balangingi is scarcely 6 square miles in area,
low, flat, surrounded by shoals, and covered to a great extent by
mangrove swamps. Most of its settlements had their houses built over
the water and little dry land could be seen in the vicinity. Part
of this land was covered with coconut trees. A labyrinth of small,
narrow channels led to the various settlements and divided the island
into four distinct parts. Four strong forts were built by the Moros
at points difficult of access and surrounded by swamps. These forts
were constructed of thick trunks of trees driven into the soil as
piles and set close to each other and in 3 rows of varying heights,
to afford suitable positions for the artillery, part of which was set
in covered inclosures commanding the channel leading to the fort. The
walls of these forts were 20 feet high and could not be scaled without
ladders. The immediate vicinity of the fort was set with sharpened
bamboo sticks and pits to hinder and trap the attacking forces. The
fort of Sipak, the strongest of the four, was provided with redoubts
and towers and showed considerable skill in its construction.

The Spanish troops consisted of three regular companies of infantry,
two of volunteers, and detachments of artillery, pikemen, engineers,
and laborers. They experienced some difficulty in landing and attacked
the most accessible fort first. The fighting was heroic and desperate
on both sides. The Moros, it is said, fought like fiends; but they were
completely overpowered in the end. In the fort of Sipak many women
and children were gathered and considerable property was stored. The
Moros had hoped to save all within its impregnable walls. When these
walls were entered, some of the defenders in their desperation thrust
their spears and krises into their wives and children, killed them
first, and then dashed themselves against sure death at the point of
Spanish bayonets. The Moros consider such action most valorous and
honorable and do it in order not to allow their wives and children
to fall into slavery or be killed by the hand of the enemy.

In the fight at the first fort 100 Moros perished and 14 pieces
of artillery were captured. The Spaniards lost 7 dead and 50
wounded. After the reduction of the second fort at Sipak 340 Moros were
burned in one pile and 150, mostly women and children, were taken as
prisoners; others, who sought refuge in the swamps or tried to swim
away, were killed by the fire of the fleet and their bodies were
washed ashore by the waves. The Spanish losses in this engagement
amounted to 17 dead, 4 officers and 13 men, and 155 wounded. Three
hundred slave captives were rescued and 66 pieces of artillery were
captured. Quantities of ammunition, silks, silver and gold vessels,
bracelets and other ornaments, jewels, utensils and arms of all sorts,
and books of prayer were found inside the fort.

The troops investing the third fortification at Sungap found the
fort evacuated, but the first Spaniard who scaled the wall fell dead
from a kampilan blow at the hand of the only Moro who refused to run
away and remained at his post to meet what he considered an honorable
death. Thirteen cannons of small caliber were found in this fort. The
Moros who had fled to the fourth fort at Bukutingal did not make any
determined stand, but soon fled leaving several cannons behind. The
Spaniards desolated the island, burned its forts and settlements,
and cut down more than 8,000 coconut trees.

The conquest of the Balangingi Samals was complete and the expedition
returned to Manila in triumph. Here great rejoicings, parades, and
festivities were held in honor of the event. Governor Claveria was
decorated and promoted by the Queen and many of the officers and men
were variously rewarded.

The Balangingi Samals rivaled the Sulus in power, bravery, and wealth,
but the signal victory of Claveria crushed them so completely that
they have never since had any considerable force. The Samals who were
carried away were transplanted to the Province of Kagayan in northern
Luzon, where they remained until a late date.


VISITS TO JOLO OF CAPTAIN HENRY KEPPEL AND SIR JAMES BROOKE

In December, 1848, Jolo was visited by Capt. Henry Keppel, in command
of the Maeander, and his description of the town contained in the
following extracts taken from his "Visit to the Indian Archipelago"
will be of unusual interest: [207]


    The town is built partly on land and partly on the sea. That
    part which is on the land, and which might almost be called the
    citadel, was at the time of our visit, strongly stockaded and
    flanked with batteries mounting heavy guns * * *. That portion
    of the town which is not within the stockades is built in regular
    Malay fashion, on piles. The houses run in rows, or streets; and
    outside of them is a platform about 6 feet wide to walk upon. This
    is supported underneath by a light scaffolding of bamboo. These
    rows of birdcage-looking buildings extend into the sea for half a
    mile over a shoal which is nearly dry at low water. The population
    is numerous, composed principally of fishermen and Chinese
    traders. The said platform runs the whole length of the rows:
    and its planks were so carelessly thrown across that it seemed
    wonderful how the children could escape, if they always did escape,
    falling through the yawning spaces which invited them to a watery,
    or a muddy grave; they were crawling about these rickety stages
    in vast numbers; if the tide was out when they fell, they would
    be received into 3 feet deep of soft mud, supposing always that
    they did not break their little backs across the gunwales of the
    canoes beneath, which were made fast to the scaffolding. * * *

    What we saw of the country [in the neighborhood of Jolo]
    was highly cultivated, consisting, with intervals of jungle,
    of pasture grounds and gardens, very flourishing and pretty,
    with abundance of cattle. * * *

    The day after we had commenced [watering] was a market day. The
    mountaineers came down in parties of from six to twelve, mounted
    on well-formed little horses, or oxen, according to their
    rank and means; on these they sat with graceful ease, spear in
    hand--they were all well armed besides, with shield and kris;
    in some instances also we observed the heavy two-handed Ilanun
    sword [kampilan]. They had a wild and independent bearing;
    and, when seen in groups, some standing, some squatting, the
    women all chattering, under the wide spreading tree, they much
    increased the interest of the already picturesque scene. They
    seemed indifferent as to the sale of their stock, which was
    conducted chiefly by the women, who freely accompanied them,
    and were by no means ill favored. The townspeople, who met and
    traded with these mountaineers, were dressed in gayer colors,
    but not so well armed. * * * Though the market on this occasion
    was well attended, the trade was slack; but I doubt not that,
    in the palmy days of active piracy, a considerable amount of
    business was transacted under this old banyan tree. * * *

    December 30 was the day appointed for Sir James Brooke's
    interview with the Sultan of Sulu. We landed in full costume at
    10 o'clock. Having walked over the sea suburbs, and arrived at
    the beach, we found a guard of honor and attendants waiting to
    conduct Sir James to the Sultan's presence; they were a motley
    group, but made themselves useful in clearing the way.

    Passing within the outer stockade, we arrived, after a few minute's
    walk, at the royal residence. It was walled in and fortified:
    a large space was inclosed by double rows of heavy piles driven
    into the earth, about 5 feet apart, and the space was filled up
    with large stones and earth, making a very solid wall of about
    15 feet in height, having embrasures, or rather portholes, in
    convenient places for cannon, out of which we noticed the rusty
    muzzles of some very heavy guns protruding. A great part of the
    town was stockaded in a similar way; and the country houses of
    the datus and mountain chiefs of any importance were also walled
    in and had guns mounted.

    Passing through a massive gateway, pretty well flanked with guns
    and loopholes, we entered a large court, in which some 2,000
    persons were assembled, armed and in their best apparel, but
    observing no sort of order; it was a wild and novel sight. Malays
    are always armed. The kris to them is what the sword was to
    an English gentleman in the feudal times. Every person who, by
    virtue of his rank or on any other pretext, could gain admittance
    was in attendance on this occasion; for our Rajah had become a
    justly celebrated man in the great Eastern Archipelago, and was
    an object of curiosity.

    We were conducted through the crowd to a corner of the courtyard,
    where a building inferior to a small English barn, was pointed
    out as the Sultan's palace. We entered it by a flight of broad
    wooden steps (for the palace was raised on piles), through a
    narrow passage thronged with guards * * * and we found ourselves
    in the royal presence.

    The audience chamber was not very large; a table, covered with
    green cloth, ran across the center of it; above the table, and
    around the upper end of the room sat a very brilliant semicircle of
    personages, the Sultan occupying a raised seat in the middle. The
    cortège consisted of his grand vizier, the members of the royal
    family, and the great datus and officers of state. Behind these
    stood the guards and attendants, dressed in silks, the colors
    being according to the fancy of their respective masters.

    The Sultan gave us a gracious reception, shaking hands with each
    officer as he was presented. This ceremony over, chairs were
    placed for Sir James and his suite; while those of our party,
    who could not get seats, formed a semicircle on the other side
    of the table. The scene was striking and gay.

    The Sultan is a young-looking man, but with a dull and vacant
    expression, produced by the too free use of opium: his lips
    were red with the mixture of betel nut and cere leaf, [208]
    which he chewed.

    He was dressed in rich silks, red and green the predominant
    colors. A large jewel sparkled in his turban, and he wore jewels
    also profusely on his person.

    The hilt of his kris, the great distinguishing ornament of all
    Malays, was beautifully decorated with gold wire, curiously
    twisted in. Immediately behind the Sultan, in closest attendance
    on his person, stood the cupbearer, a fine young man dressed in
    green silk, who held in his hand a purple finger glass, which
    was constantly held to his royal master's mouth, to receive
    the filthy-looking mixture which is in such favor with these
    people--composed of the juice of the betel leaf, with the areca
    nut and gambier. The other personages composing the circle were
    dressed with equal gaudiness, in bright silks; in the selection,
    however, of their colors they displayed considerable taste. Many
    of the guards were dressed in very ancient chain armor, consisting
    of skull caps and tunics, covering the arms and reaching from
    the throat to the knee.

    Those armed with sword, spear, and kris did not look amiss; but
    two sentries, placed to guard the entrance to this ancient hall of
    audience, each shouldering a very shabby-looking old Tower musket,
    of which they looked very proud, had an absurd effect.

    After a reasonable time passed by each party in admiration of
    the other, the conversation was opened by Sir James Brooke, who,
    as Her Majesty's commissioner in these regions, submitted to the
    Sultan certain propositions on matters of business.

    To these His Majesty expressed his willingness to accede; and
    he graciously reminded Sir James that the royal family of Sulu
    were under considerable obligations to the English; inasmuch as
    his great-grandfather, Sultan Amir, [209] having been once upon
    a time imprisoned by the Spaniards in the fortress of Manila,
    was delivered from durance vile and reinstated on the throne of
    his ancestors by Alexander Dalrymple----A. D. 1763. This was now
    the more liberal on the part of His Majesty, because his royal
    ancestor had not at the time allowed the service to be altogether
    unrequited; for he ceded to the English Government a fine island
    adjoining Sulu (of which, by the bye, no use appears to have been
    made), together with the north end of Borneo and the south end
    of Palawan, with the intervening islands.

    At length we took leave of his Majesty, retiring in much the
    same order as that in which we had entered. Although no actual
    treaty was concluded with the Sultan, Sir James paved the way for
    opening up commerce and for cultivating a better understanding
    with the natives.

    In the afternoon we visited one Datu Daniel, a powerful chief,
    very friendly, and well disposed toward the English. His stronghold
    was at a short distance in the country, at the foot of one of the
    mountain slopes, fortified in much the same way as the Sultan's,
    but on a smaller scale; his stockades were, however, quite as
    strong, and his guns in better order. His inclosed court, being
    likewise a farmyard with a good supply of live stock, looked as
    if he was better prepared than his royal master to stand a long
    siege; his wives looked happy, his children merry, and, on the
    whole, his domestic life appeared tolerably comfortable. * * *

    Considering that Sulu was the great commercial center of these
    seas, we were surprised at not seeing more large praus; there
    were none afloat, and very few hauled up; the number, however,
    of building sheds and blacksmith's forges showed that they have
    the means of starting into activity at short notice.


Who could have thought that, after such devastation and havoc as the
Spaniards wrought on Balangingi, another chief would have the courage
to settle on such a hateful spot again! Yet we learn that in spite
of the contrary advice of the Sultan and his council, Datu Tampang,
as early as December, 1848, stationed himself at Pa'at, Balangingi
Island, and constructed a fort with the intention of defying the
Spanish forces and fighting them again. An isolated case like this can
not be explained except on the ground of foolhardiness, for Tampang
was soon after that dislodged by the governor of Zamboanga. But it
appears that it was necessary again for the Spaniards to send another
squadron under Manuel Quesada, consisting of two steam gunboats and
other sloops and vessels, to clean up Balangingi once more and to
strike at the Moros of Basilan and Pilas. Nor was this sufficient, for
we learn that before the end of the same month of December, 3,000 Sulus
and Samals attacked the Spanish forces on Basilan, probably at Isabela,
and were repulsed. In 1849 the Spaniards retaliated and reduced to
ashes the settlements of Bwal, Samalang, and Gumbalang. Undaunted,
the Moros of Tonkil, together with others, in 1850 raided the Islands
of Samar and Kamigin and carried away more than 75 natives.