Chapter IX. Chapters LXXIV and LXXV secured a passage for the deceased
in the Henu Boat of Seker the Death-god, and Chapter LXXVI brought
to his help the praying mantis which guided him through the "bush"
to the House of Osiris. By the recital of Chapters LXXVII-LXXXVIII,
i.e., the "Chapters of Transformations," the deceased was enabled
to assume at will the forms of (1) the Golden Hawk, (2) the Divine
Hawk, (3) the Great Self-created God, (4) the Light-god or the Robe
of Nu, (5) the Pure Lily, (6) the Son of Ptah, (7) the Benu Bird,
(8) the Heron, (9) the Soul of Ra, (10) the Swallow, (11) the Sata
or Earth-serpent, (12) the Crocodile. Chapter LXXXIX brought the soul
(ba) of the deceased to his body in the Tuat, and Chapter XC preserved
him from mutilation and attacks of the god who "cut off heads and slit
foreheads." Chapters XCI and XCII prevented the soul of the deceased
from being shut in the tomb. Chapter XCIII is a spell very difficult
to understand. Chapters XCIV and XCV provided the deceased with the
books of Thoth and the power of this god, and enabled him to take his
place as the scribe of Osiris. Chapters XCVI and XCVII also placed him
under the protection of Thoth. The recital of Chapter XCVIII provided
the deceased with a boat in which to sail over the northern heavens,
and a ladder by which to ascend to heaven. Chapters XCIX-CIII gave him
the use of the magical boat, the mystic name of each part of which
he was obliged to know, and helped him to enter the Boat of Ra and
to be with Hathor. The Bebait, or mantis, led him to the great gods
(Chapter CIV), and the Uatch amulet from the neck of Ra provided
his double (ka) and his heart-soul (ba) with offerings (Chapters CV,
CVI). Chapters CVII-CIX made him favourably known to the spirits of
the East and West, and the gods of the Mountain of Sunrise. In this
region lived the terrible Serpent-god Ami-hem-f; he was 30 cubits
(50 feet) long. In the East the deceased saw the Morning Star, and
the Two Sycamores, from between which the Sun-god appeared daily,
and found the entrance to the Sekhet Aaru or Elysian Fields. Chapter
CX and its vignette of the Elysian Fields have already been described
(see p. 31). Chapters CXI and CXII describe how Horus lost the sight
of his eye temporarily through looking at Set under the form of a
black pig, and Chapter CXIII refers to the legend of the drowning of
Horus and the recovery of his body by Sebek the Crocodile-god. Chapter
CXIV enabled the deceased to absorb the wisdom of Thoth and his Eight
gods. Chapters CXV-CXXII made him lord of the Tuats of Memphis and
Heliopolis, and supplied him with food, and Chapter CXXIII enabled
him to identify himself with Thoth. Chapters CXXIV and CXXV, which
treat of the Judgment, have already been described. Chapter CXXVI
contains a prayer to the Four Holy Apes, Chapter CXXVII a hymn to
the gods of the "Circles" in the Tuat, and Chapter CXXVIII a hymn to
Osiris. Chapters CXXX and CXXXI secured for the deceased the use of
the Boats of Sunrise and Sunset, and Chapter CXXXII enabled him to
return to earth and visit the house he had lived in. Chapters CXXXIII
(or CXXXIX)-CXXXVI resemble in contents Chapter CXXXI. Chapter
CXXXVII describes a series of magical ceremonies that were to be
performed for the deceased daily in order to make him to become a
"living soul for ever." The formulae are said to have been composed
under the IVth dynasty. Chapter CXXXVIII refers to the ceremony of
reconstituting Osiris, and Chapters CXL-CXLII deal with the setting
up of twelve altars, and the making of offerings to all the gods and
to the various forms of Osiris. Chapter CXLIII consists of a series
of vignettes, in three of which solar boats are represented.

Chapters CXLIV and CXLVII deal with the Seven Great Halls (Arit) of
the Kingdom of Osiris. The gate of each Hall was guarded by a porter,
a watchman, and a messenger; the first kept the door, the second looked
out for the arrival of visitors, and the third took their names to
Osiris. No one could enter a Hall without repeating the name of it,
of the porter, of the watchman, and of the messenger. According to a
late tradition the Gates of the Kingdom of Osiris were twenty-one in
number (Chapters CXLV and CXLVI), and each had a magical name, and
each was guarded by one or two gods, whose names had to be repeated
by the deceased before he could pass. Chapter CXLVIII supplied the
deceased with the names of the Seven Cows and their Bull on which the
"gods" were supposed to feed. Chapters CXLIX and CL give the names
of the Fourteen Aats, or districts, of the Kingdom of Osiris. Chapter
*CLI-A and *CLI-B give a picture of the mummy chamber and the magical
texts that were necessary for the protection of both the chamber and
the mummy in it. Chapter CLII provided a house for the deceased in
the Celestial Anu, and Chapter *CLIII-A and *CLIII-B enabled his soul
to avoid capture in the net of the snarer of souls. Chapter CLIV is
an address to Osiris in which the deceased says, "I shall not decay,
nor rot, nor putrefy, nor become worms, nor see corruption. I shall
have my being, I shall live, I shall flourish, I shall rise up
in peace." Chapters CLV-CLXVII are spells which were engraved on
the amulets, giving the deceased the protection of Ra, Osiris, Isis,
Horus, and other gods. The remaining Chapters (CLXVIII-CXC) are of a
miscellaneous character, and few of them are found in more than one
or two papyri of the Book of the Dead. A few contain hymns that are
not older than the XVIIIth dynasty, and one is an extract from the
text on the Pyramid of Unas (lines 379-399). The most interesting is,
perhaps, Chapter CLXXV, which describes the Tuat as airless,
waterless, and lightless. In this chapter the deceased is assured
of immortality in the words, "Thou shalt live for millions of millions
of years, a life of millions of years."


E. A. Wallis Budge.

Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum.

April 15, 1920.


Note.

The Trustees of the British Museum have published:--

1. Coloured facsimile of the Papyrus of Hunefer, XIXth dynasty,
with hieroglyphic transcript and translation. 11 plates, large folio.

2. Coloured facsimile of the Papyrus of Anhai, XXIst dynasty, with
hieroglyphic transcript and translation. 8 plates, large folio.

3. Collotype reproduction of the Papyrus of Queen Netchemet, XXIst
dynasty, with hieroglyphic transcript and translation. 12 plates,
large folio.

4. Coloured reproduction of the hieratic text of the Book of
Breathings, with hieroglyphic transcript and translation. With 2
collotypes of the vignettes, large folio.

5. Hieroglyphic transcript of the Papyrus of Nu, with one collotype
plate.

Nos. 1-5 are bound in one volume, price £2 10s.

6. Collotype reproduction of the Papyrus of Queen Nesi-ta-nebt-ashru,
with full descriptions of the vignettes, translations, and
introduction, containing several illustrations, and 116 plates of
hieratic text. Large 4to. Price £2 10s.


FOOTNOTES

[1] See Journal de Trévoux, June, 1704; Caylus, Antiq. Egypt., tom. I,
plate 21; Denon, Travels, plates 136 and 137; and Description de
l'Égypte, tom. II, plate 64 ff.

[2] Copie Figurée d'un Rouleau de Papyrus trouvé à Thèbes dans un
tombeau des Rois. Paris, XIII-1805. This papyrus is nearly 30 feet
in length and was brought to Strassburg by a paymaster in Napoleon's
Army in Egypt called Poussielgue, who sold it to M. Cadet.

[3] [Hieroglyphs].

[4] The longest papyrus in the world is Papyrus Harris No. 1
(Brit. Mus. No. 9999); it measures 133 feet by 1 foot 4 1/2 inches.

[5] Pyramid of Pepi I, ll. 664 and 662.

[6] I.e., Truth, or Law, in a double aspect.

[7] A name of Osiris.

[8] I.e., the "Lord to the uttermost limit of everything," or God.

[9] He was according to one legend the firstborn son of Osiris.

[10] I.e., I have kept the Moral and Divine Law.

[11] I.e., the "Beneficent Being," a title of Osiris.


End of Project Gutenberg's The Book of the Dead, by E. A. Wallis Budge