Chapter XV has several forms, and each of them contains Hymns to Ra,
which were sung daily in the morning and evening; specimen paragraphs
are given above (pp. 33, 34). Chapter XVI is only a vignette that
illustrates Chapter XV, Chapter XVII is a very important chapter,
for it contains statements of divine doctrine as understood by the
priests of Heliopolis. The opening words are, "I am Tem in rising. I
am the Only One. I came into being in Nu (the Sky). I am Ra, who rose
in primeval time, ruler of what he had made." Following this comes the
question, "Who is this?" and the answer is, "It is Ra who rose in the
city of Hensu, in primeval time, crowned as king. He existed on the
height of the Dweller in Khemenu (i.e., Thoth of Hermopolis) before
the pillars that support the sky were made." Chapter XVIII contains
the Addresses to Thoth, who is entreated to make the deceased to be
declared innocent before the gods of Heliopolis, Busiris, Latopolis,
Mendes, Abydos, etc. These addresses formed a very powerful spell which
was used by Horus, and when he recited it four times all his enemies
were overthrown and cut to pieces. Chapters XIX and XX are variant
forms of Chapter XVIII. Chapters XXI-XXIII secured the help of Thoth
in "opening the mouth" of the deceased, whereby he obtained the power
to breathe and think and drink and eat. Thoth recited spells over the
gods whilst Ptah untied the bandages and Shu forced open their mouths
with an iron (?) knife. Chapter XXIV gave to the deceased a knowledge
of the "words of power" (hekau) which were used by the great god
Tem-Khepera, and Chapter XXV restored to him his memory. Five chapters,
XXVI-XXX, contain prayers and spells whereby the deceased obtained
power over his heart and gained absolute possession of it. The most
popular prayer is that of Chapter XXXB (see above, p. 4) which,
according to its rubric, was "found," i.e., edited, by Herutataf,
the son of the great Cheops, about 3600 B.C. This prayer was still
in use in the early years of the Christian Era. In the Papyrus of
Nu it is associated with Chapter LXIV, and the earliest form of it
was probably in existence under the Ist dynasty.

Chapters XXXI-XLII were written to deliver the deceased from the
Great Crocodile Sui, and the Serpents Rerek and Seksek, and the Lynx
with its deadly claws, and the Beetle Apshait, and the terrible Merti
snake-goddesses, and a group of three particularly venomous serpents,
and Aapep a personification of Set the god of evil, and the Eater
of the Ass, and a series of beings who lived by slaughtering the
souls of the dead. In Chapter XLII every member of the deceased is
put under the protection of, or identified with, a god or goddess,
e.g., the hair with Nu, the face with Aten (i.e., the solar disk),
the eyes with Hathor, and the deceased exclaims triumphantly, "There
is no member of my body which is not the member of a god." Chapter
XLIII. A spell to prevent the decapitation of the deceased, who
assumes in it the character of Osiris the Lord of Eternity. Chapter
XLIV. An ancient and mighty spell, the recital of which prevented the
deceased from dying a second time. Chapters XLV and XLVI preserved
the mummy of the deceased from decay, and Chapter XLVII prevented
the removal of his seat or throne. Chapter L enabled the deceased
to avoid the block of execution of the god Shesmu. Chapters LI-LIII
provided the deceased with pure food and clean water from the table
of the gods; he lived upon what they lived upon, and so became one
with them. Chapters LIV-LXII gave the deceased power to obtain cool
water from the Celestial Nile and the springs of waters of heaven, and
being identified with Shu, the god of light and air, he was enabled
to pass over all the earth at will. His life was that of the Egg of
the "Great Cackler," and the goddess Sesheta built a house for him
in the Celestial Anu, or Heliopolis.

The recital of Chapter LXIII enabled the deceased to avoid drinking
boiling water in the Tuat. The water in some of its pools was cool
and refreshing to those who were speakers of the truth, but it turned
into boiling water and scalded the wicked when they tried to drink
of it. Chapter LXIV is an epitome of the whole Book of the Dead,
and it formed a "great and divine protection" for the deceased. The
text is of a mystical character and suggests that the deceased could,
through its recital, either absorb the gods into his being, or become
himself absorbed by them. Its rubric orders abstention from meats,
fish and women on the part of those who were to recite it. Chapter LXV
gave the deceased victory over all his enemies, and Chapters LXVI and
LXVII gave him access to the Boat of Ra. Chapters LXVIII-LXX procured
him complete freedom of motion in heaven and on earth. Chapter LXXI
is a series of addresses to the Seven Spirits who punished the wicked
in the Kingdom of Osiris, and Chapter LXXII aided the deceased to
be reborn in the Mesqet Chamber. The Mesqet was originally a bull's
skin in which the deceased was wrapped. Chapter LXXIII is the same as