CHAPTER IX

A Short Description of the "Doors" or Chapters of the Book of the Dead.

All the great papyri of the Book of the Dead begin with a HYMN TO RA,
who from the period of the IVth dynasty was the "King of the Gods"
of Egypt. His cult was finally "established" under the Vth dynasty
when the king of Egypt began to call himself in official documents
and monuments "Son of the Sun," Sa Ra. This Hymn is supposed to be
sung by the deceased, who says:--

"Homage to thee, O Ra, at thy beauteous rising. Thou risest, thou
risest; thou shinest, thou shinest at the dawn. Thou art King of
the Gods, and the Maati goddesses embrace thee. The Company of the
Gods praise thee at sunrise and at sunset. Thou sailest over the
heights of heaven and thy heart is glad. Thy Morning Boat meeteth
thy Evening Boat with fair winds. Thy father is the Sky-god and
thy mother is the Sky-goddess, and thou art Horus of the Eastern
and Western skies. ... O thou Only One, O thou Perfect One, O thou
who art eternal, who art never weak, whom no mighty one can abase;
none hath dominion over the things which appertain to thee. Homage to
thee in thy characters of Horus, Tem, and Khepera, thou Great Hawk,
who makest man to rejoice by thy beautiful face. When thou risest men
and women live. Thou renewest thy youth, and dost set thyself in the
place where thou wast yesterday. O Divine Youth, who art self-created,
I cannot comprehend thee. Thou art the lord of heaven and earth,
and didst create beings celestial and beings terrestrial. Thou art
the God One, who camest into being in the beginning of time. Thou
didst create the earth, and man, thou didst make the sky and the
celestial river Hep; thou didst make the waters and didst give life
unto all that therein is. Thou hast knit together the mountains, thou
hast made mankind and the beasts of the field to come into being, and
hast made the heavens and the earth. The fiend Nak is overthrown, his
arms are cut off. O thou Divine Youth, thou heir of everlastingness,
self-begotten and self-born, One, Might, of myriad forms and aspects,
Prince of An (i.e., On), Lord of Eternity, Everlasting Ruler, the
Company of the Gods rejoice in thee. As thou risest thou growest
greater: thy rays are upon all faces. Thou art unknowable, and no
tongue can describe thy similitude; thou existest alone. Millions
of years have passed over the world, I cannot tell the number of
those through which thou hast passed. Thou journeyest through spaces
[requiring] millions of years [to pass over] in one little moment of
time, and then thou settest and dost make an end of the hours."

The subject matter of the above extract is treated at greater length
in Chapter XV, which contains a long Hymn to Ra at his rising, or
Amen-Ra, or Ra united to other solar gods, e.g., Horus and Khepera,
and a short Hymn to Ra at his setting. In the latter the welcome
which Ra receives from the dwellers in Amentt (i.e., the Hidden Place,
like the Greek "Hades") is emphasized thus:--

"All the beautified dead (Aakhu) in the Tuat receive him in the horizon
of Amentt. They shout praises of him in his form of Tem (i.e., the
setting sun). Thou didst rise and put on strength, and thou settest,
a living being, and thy glories are in Amentt. The gods of Amentt
rejoice in thy beauties (or beneficence). The hidden ones worship
thee, the aged ones bring thee offerings and protect thee. The Souls
of Amentt cry out, and when they meet thy Majesty (Life, Strength,
Health be to thee!) they shout 'Hail! Hail!' The lords of the mansions
of the Tuat stretch out their hands to thee from their abodes,
and they cry to thee, and they follow in thy bright train, and the
hearts of the lords of the Tuat rejoice when thou sendest thy light
into Amentt. Their eyes follow thee, they press forward to see thee,
and their hearts rejoice at the sight of thy face. Thou hearkenest to
the petitions of those who are in their tombs, thou dispellest their
helplessness and drivest away evil from them. Thou givest breath to
their nostrils. Thou art greatly feared, thy form is majestic, and
very greatly art thou beloved by those who dwell in the Other World."

The Introductory HYMN TO RA is followed by a HYMN TO OSIRIS, in which
the deceased says:--

"Glory be to thee, O Osiris Un-Nefer, thou great god in Abtu
(Abydos), King of Eternity, Lord of Everlastingness, God whose
existence is millions of years, eldest son of Nut, begotten by Geb,
the Ancestor-Chief, Lord of the Crowns of the South and the North,
Lord of the High White Crown. Thou art the Governor of gods and of
men and hast received the sceptre, the whip, and the rank of thy
Divine Fathers. Let thy heart in Amentt be content, for thy son
Horus is seated upon thy throne. Thou art Lord of Tetu (Busiris)
and Governor of Abtu (Abydos). Thou makest fertile the Two Lands
(i.e., all Egypt) by [thy] true word before the Lord to the Uttermost
Limit.... Thy power is widespread, and great is the terror of thy name
'Osiris.' Thou endurest for all eternity in thy name of 'Un-Nefer'
(i.e., Beneficent Being). Homage to thee, King of kings, Lord of
lords, Governor of governors, who from the womb of the Sky-goddess
hast ruled the World and the Under World. Thy limbs are as silver-gold,
thy hand is blue like lapis-lazuli, and the space on either side
of thee is of the colour of turquoise (or emerald). Thou god An
of millions of years, thy body is all-pervading, O dweller in the
Land of Holiness, thy face is beautiful ... The gods come before
thee bowing low. They hold thee in fear. They withdraw and retreat
when they see the awfulness of Ra upon thee; the [thought] of the
conquests of thy Majesty is in their hearts. Life is with thee.

"Let me follow thy Majesty as when I was on earth, let my soul be
summoned, and let it be found near the Lords of Truth. I have come
to the City of God, the region that is eternally old, with my soul
(ba), double (ka) and spirit-soul (aakhu), to be a dweller in this
land. Its God is the Lord of Truth ... he giveth old age to him that
worketh Truth, and honour to his followers, and at the last abundant
equipment for the tomb, and burial in the Land of Holiness. I have
come unto thee, my hands hold Truth, and there is no falsehood in
my heart ... Thou hast set Truth before thee: I know on what thou
livest. I have committed no sin in this land, and I have defrauded
no man of his possessions." (Chapter CLXXXIII.)