SEA
a
A
ie
tee
ge Cee
ee
eee
Leet ase FY PDI Se pF Sern Tears FOE
aot
ean
One
od
SE
tae =
-
—>
:
—
--
a
> IE
an
Se
on
Sg
ee
ne
Eh
nop
NS
A
ee
nee
——
Ss -
oe
_
aes
=
(Fo
3
_~
Sree
aera
SOP
te
AT
aa
- ot
eth
eee
SA
=
-
=e
ee
==
a2
eats: Figo
e Lt ges
pags
Pee
SPREE
GEO
CR IRE
TABS
Sh GONE
RE
ESR
GREE
P
ESET
AES
a= es
bP
Se
= — Sea
ae
Semel enemas
~
=
a
—-—
.
— ge
sta
ee a Fame
;
Z
:
= a
,
Pee
ef
am
ms
oo
—,
-
=
re
a
os
Pe
~
So
. ae
RS
pte
ee
BI
pO
ee
TAT
Gk
Ee
pig
Om
ea
SSeS
Se
eS :
2
So
;
~e -
a
a
i
On a Ow =
<=
ese
ORE
ne
SEO
Lo —~ Fen = os «
——
i
4)
‘ \
Ay
v
Y
ii %
)
a) * WN, 4
APRA AAAS yy.) pty iy
AUP AS
ARN : ah i}
haa my
TREN a va
vid FAY Ny
NS




ote -
> tr
ey a BE NICA RS
Re i
iliac


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation
htto:/www.archive.org/details/bylinyoookherota0Oharr —






HERO TALES OF RUSSIA


ee tan an Nutt AURA aire
UNNI A aN
SPUR HR i % iy


ean
ae at oe
na i en ria i"
“se lees we a
: ul 7 ne ie er a he ee o ei a ai a diee he, i Ay ten wa 4 oy || ,
, ri ch, o he i! ol : i!
ihe) -
a) on | ee Fk tie. ‘
an re
iT
f) Nan
~ a, : bh y a it} Vs '
lie ae a
ae.
Wi et i
; ean Vie
ay D Ace :
ae a
Seri : é ¥ i Ne


ng
Je"


BYLINY BOOK
HERO TALES OF RUSSIA
Told from the Russian by
MARION CHILTON HARRISON
With Illustrations by
MRS. HUGH STEWART
2%, D2,
CAMBRIDGE:
W. HEFFER & SONS LTD.
* 1915


@0333
W. HeFFer & Sons, LTD.,
104, Hirits Roan,
CAMBRIDGE.
eceoe


C398
1
PREFACE.
This is a Byliny Book. What does “ Byliny’”’ mean ?
It is a Russian word, and it means stories about
What-has-Been, what happened in Russia in the old
days long ago. We all read about the Greek heroes
Jason and Perseus and Theseus and Heracles. The
Russians had splendid heroes too, who met with
wonderful adventures. Russia and France and Italy
and England are fighting side by side a great fight
for freedom, and these old heroes of Russia fought for
freedom too, against great barbarian armies of Huns
and Tartars. The Russians are our brave friends, our
“ Allies,” as we call them now, and it is good to get
to know about their heroes of olden times.
We all know and honour our French Allies, and
most of us try to speak French. We are proud to
read in history how our William the Conqueror came
over from France and brought with him many good
laws and customs, and, best of all, beautiful French
words that have now become English—why, the very
word beauty came to us from France. But Russia is
much further away than France, and very few of us
learn to speak Russian, or even to read it.
vii


PREFACE.
Far the best way to get to know people is to
learn their language, but it is not quite so easy to
learn to read Russian as it is to read French, because
the Russians use different letters. You will see
Russian letters in the pictures'; they are beautiful,
delightful things, and some of them are like English,
so it is exciting to try and make them out, but some
of them are like Greek, for the Russians always liked
the Greeks better than the Romans.
The Russian names of the heroes look a little
strange at first, but they are not really hard to pro-
nounce. There are a great many Russian heroes, but
this book only tells about four of them, Volga and
Mikula and Svyatogér and Ilyé. Volga is quite short
and easy, and so is Mikula, which is pronounced as if
it was written Mikéolla. Svyatogér looks rather hard,
but you only have to remember to say it like
this—Svyatagorr, and you must roll the r’s as if you
were a Scotsman. The Russians put the accent on
the end of their words much oftener than the English.
We say ie van and they say Hevdhn. And 80 it is with
the last hero, Ilya’; he is pronounced Eelyah. Besides
the heroes there is Vladimir the king, and he is called
Vladéemir. The only really hard word to say right is
Byliny itself, and that you can call Bwiléeny, but our
English lips do not make quite the Russian sound.
These heroes Volga and Ilya and the rest lived very
1The Russian titles are translated in the List of Illustrations, p. xv.
viii


PREFACE.
long ago, and their great city was not Petrograd but
Kiev (Kieft). Petrograd means “ Peter's fortified town,”’
and we all know how till the war it used to be called
Peters-burg. But if you look on the map you will
find no Petrograd, only Kiev on the river Dnieper,
which winds down to the Black Sea. The old Russian
heroes used to sail down the river on through the
Black Sea down to Constantinople, and there of course
they met the Greeks, and the Greeks taught them to
be Christians. That was in the days of good King
Vladimir, and he was reigning before our William the
Conqueror, hundreds of years before Peter the Great
came to Holland and England and learnt to build
boats, and made the great city of Petrograd.
But though the heroes lived so long ago, they are
never forgotten. The Russian children in the village
schools learn about Volgé and Ilya as soon as they
can read, and old minstrels in far away villages beyond
lake Onéga and even in Siberia sing the Byliny, the
songs of What-has-Been to the peasants as they sit
round the fire at night. I have seen a picture of one
of these singers, an old peasant over seventy, with a
long white beard and shaggy hair and bright deep-set
eyes. He could not write or read, and his voice was
rather cracked, but when he sang the old songs he was
all on fire, and he sang them so splendidly that
the villagers crowded round to hear. The old men
say that the young ones will not learn to
sing the songs because they are gramotnye, “ grammar-
people,” who read books and learn to write—what a pity.
ibd


PREFACE.
A learned Russian called Hilferding went to North
Russia to live among the peasants and listen to these
stories. The peasants are very poor, and are shy with
strangers, but they learned to love and trust Hilferding,
and sang their songs to him. It is nice to know that
he was able to help the peasants, and get them a little
more money and food. Other learned men had been
before Hilferding, but nearly all the stories in this
book were collected by him, so we like to remember
his name.
It is the peasants who sing the Byliny, not the
nobles, and two of the greatest Russian heroes, Ilya
and Mikula, are peasants’ sons. Mikula is a ploughman.
It sounds strange to us that a ploughman should be a
hero; but the Russians did not feel like that. They
love their land with all their hearts. Some of it has
very black fertile soil, but some of it is very hard and
full of stones, and sometimes of forests to be cleared, and
the man who does all this is a hero. The Russians
sing a hymn to the honour of Mikula; it ends “Glory
to thee, good Mikula, the peasant who worked.” In
one of the pictures you see Volga, the prince, come to
beg Mikula to leave his plough and join his warriors.
Mikula was sad, but a man must leave even his work
to defend his country. Mikula is my favourite of all
the heroes.
The peasant heroes, Mikula and great Ilya4, are
very proud and independent, and sometimes not very
respectful to the King; they seem to think they are
as good as he is, and so they were. It is their country
x


PREFACE.
they love, and their beautiful city of Kiev and its
Church, and in those old days they had not learned
that the King stands for the country. Ilyd is always
wanting to get to Kiev; you see him on the cover of this
book, riding up to the Holy City. It is like Jerusalem
to him, and he was buried there. But though he
dreams of the City, he loves the place where he was born,
near Mirom. Murom is a real place still, with forests
round it and a river full of fish. The peasants in the
old days owned the land in common, so each village
was like a little kingdom. Tlyé hates the dog, King
Kalin, because he slays the villagers.
Svyatogér’s name means Holy Mountain. He is
very strong and huge, like a mountain, but he is
clumsy and rather boastful. He boasted he could lift
anything, but he soon found he couldn’t. At the end
he stops boasting, and is good to young Ilya, and gives
him all his strength, so that makes up.
The hero who really can do everything is Volga.
He was a prince, not a peasant, and he was a mighty
hunter, like Nimrod in the Bible; and he was a wizard,
too, and could turn himself into a grey wolf. Some
people said his father was a wolf, some said he
was a serpent. The story says “damp earth was
his cradle,’ and that sounds uncomfortable, but the
Russians always call the earth “damp earth.” They
mean that the rain has rained on it, and that it is not
hard and dry, but full of sap like the trees. Volga
learnt all his wisdom from the beasts and_ birds.
8. Francis used to preach to the birds, but Volga let
xi


PREFACE.
the beasts and birds preach to him, and that is better,
for the Bible says:
Ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee;
And the fowls of the air and they shall tell thee.
The first story is about Volgd, and in the first
picture you see him listening to a wise old Bear.
JANE ELLEN HARRISON.
This book is for children, and is no place for bibliography, but we
should like to own our debt to three books. Chudinov’s Byliny in the
“Russian School Library’’ was our first introduction (in Russian) to
the hero-tales; but for Rambaud’s La Russie Epique it would have
been difficult to put the stories together; and, last, to the kindness
of Mr. E. T. Minns we are indebted for the loan of Hilferding’s
invaluable Sbornik, now out of print, and not easily obtainable during
the War.
M. C. H.
J. HE. H.
xii


CONTENTS.
I. The Story of Volga - - - - - - is
II. Mikula the Villager’s Son 8
MER VV ALOROr 8 | ah ee os) Se ae eae
IV. Svyatogor and Tlya of Mtrom-~— - - ef Le
V. LDya of Mtrom and Nightingale the Robber 30
VI. The Three Ways- - - <0) ‘yas - - 46
VII. Ilys of Murom and King Kalin - - - 50


CHARACTERS.
Volgd, Son of Svyatoslav.
Mikula, the Ploughman Hero.
Svyatogor, the Hero.
Ily4 of Miurom, Son of Ivan.
Vladimir, Prince of Kiev.
Apraxia, his Daughter.
Nightingale, the Robber.
King Kalin, a Tartar King.
Samson, a Hero (Ilya’s Godfather).


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Volga, Son of Buslav - - - - - Fieepipece
Young Mikula, the Villager’s Son -~ - oF ist, tei
Ilya’ of Murom, the Peasant’s Son - : . - 19
Map of Ilyv’s Journeys” - : - - - - 28
He Shot Nightingale the Robber - - - 2am
Hiyaicame to Kiey Town = = -. = . =) oa
A Feast of Honour was Spread - . - - 651
There was the Old Cossack, Llya of Muirom 57
wy» These titles are literal translations of the Russian
. unscriptions on the illustrations.




Hero ‘Tales of Russia.
E
THE STORY OF VOLGA.
HE red sun was going down behind the high hills,
behind the blue sea. The countless stars
showed themselves in the clear sky, and the
bright moon was shining in the heavens when
Volga the Hero was born in Holy Russia. Damp
Mother Earth was his cradle. The earth rocked, and
there was a great storm upon the blue sea, and the
fish went down into the deep sea, the birds flew up
into the sky, the great aurochs and the deer fled over
the hills, the hares and rabbits ran into the thick
forest, and the wolves and bears fled away among the
fir trees, sables and martens escaped to the islands,
because they knew that a hero was born in Russia.
When Volga was an hour and a half old he spoke
with a voice like thunder, and said:
“Come then, O Lady, my mother, young Marfa,
put no baby-clothes upon me, nor a sash of silk, but
give me strong steel armour, and on my head put a
helmet of gold. In my right hand a club, a club made
heavy with lead of the weight of a hundred pounds.”
1


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
When Volga was seven years old his mother had
him taught to read, and she made him write with a
pen. And from all the birds and beasts he learnt
their skill and wisdom and the different tongues of
all, and he understood the speech of all the beasts of
the field and forest, and of all the birds and fishes.
When he was ten years old he learned much
magic. First he learned to turn himself into a bright
falcon, and next he learned to turn himself into a grey
wolf, and the third thing he learned was to turn him-
self into a brown aurochs, a brown aurochs with
golden hoofs.
When Volga was seventeen he called his friends
and companions together and formed a bodyguard of
thirty youths save one, and Volga himself was the
thirtieth. He was their Chief, and took them with him
on his journeys. He provided for them all and gave
them abundance of food and drink, and of sugar sweet-
meats many kinds. And warm clothes, too, he gave
them, fur coats made of the skins of marten and sable
and of panther. When his comrades slept Volga slept
not. Sometimes he turned himself into a grey wolf
and ran and leaped in the dark forest and killed
moose-deer and bears and wolves. Martens and panthers
were his favourite prey, and he spared neither hares
nor foxes. And at other times he turned himself into
a bright falcon, flew far away over the blue sea and
killed geese and white swans, and the little grey ducks
he spared not.


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
One day when he was at Kiev he called his body-
guard :
“My good brave comrades,” said he, “listen to
your big brother, your Chief. Bring a rope of silk
and make a snare. Put it into the dark forest and
set the snare upon the damp earth so as to catch
beasts of the forest, and catch martens and foxes,
black sables and other wild beasts, and go on snaring
them for three days and three nights.”
They listened to their big brother, their Chief, and
they did the thing he had ordered. They took a rope of
silk to the dark forest and set a snare upon the damp
earth, but they could not catch a single beast. Then
Volgi their Chief turned himself into a lion-beast.
He leapt and bounded on the damp earth, through
the dark forest, and drove out martens and foxes,
black sables and other wild beasts, big bounding
hares and little ermines. And Volga took his own
form again, and became a goodly youth.
And again when he was at the town of Kiev with
his body-guard of brave youths he said:
“My good comrades, my brave lads, listen to your
big brother your Chief. Take a snare of silk and set it in
the dark forest at the very tops of the trees, and
with it catch geese, swans and bright falcons, and little
singing birds, and go on snaring them for three days
and three nights.”
And they listened to their big brother their Chief.
They did the thing he ordered. They took a snare
of silk, set the snare in the dark forest, at the very
3


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
tops of the trees, but they could not catch a single
bird.
Volga the Chief turned himself into an eagle. He
flew up beneath the clouds and struck down geese,
swans, bright hawks, and little singing birds.
Again when they were at the town of Kiev, Volga
the Chief said:
“Good comrades, my brave body-guard, listen to
your big brother, your Chief. Take sharp axes, good
for cutting wood, and build a ship of oak; take
fishing nets of silk and go forth upon the blue sea,
and fish for all kinds of fish—salmon and white fish,
pike and dace, and the most precious fish—sturgeon,
and go on fishing for three days and three nights.”
They listened to their big brother their Chief, and
they did the thing he ordered. They took sharp axes,
good for cutting wood, and built a ship of oak. They
took fishing nets of silk, but they could not catch a
single fish.
Volga the Chief turned himself into a big pike
and swam in the blue sea. He sent up salmon and
white sturgeon, pike and dace, and the costly fish—
sturgeon, and drove them into the nets of his men.
And again, when he was at Kiev with his body-
guard of good comrades, Volga the Chief said:
“My good brave comrades, why should we not send to
the country of the Tartars to find out what the Cham is
thinking of? For the Cham may be thinking of
something. And what if he were thinking of riding
4


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
into Holy Russia? Now, whom shall we send? If we
send an old man he will go slowly, and we shall have
long to wait. If we send a middle-aged man he will
tarry and drink by the way; and if we send a boy he
will stop and play. It seems as if Volga will have to
go himself!”
Then Volgaé the Chief turned himself into a little
bird and flew up beneath the clouds. He flew on and
soon came to the country of the Tartars. He came to
the house of the Tartar Cham and perched at the
Cham’s own window and listened to his secret talk.
The Cham said to his wife:
“Now I tell you, my Queen, I know what I know.
In Russia the grass grows not as it used to grow.
The flowers bloom not as before. Volgi must be dead
and gone.”
The Queen said:
“Come now, Santal, Cham of Tartary, the grass
grows in Russia just as before. The flowers bloom
in Russia just as before. I dreamed in the night—
in dreams one sees all things. It seemed that from
the East, that dear country, a bird was flying—a
small singing bird—and from the West-—the old
country—after the little bird there flew a black crow.
They flew together over the open plain, and they were
pecking at each other, and the little singing bird was
pecking the black crow, and she pulled out his feathers,
and all were carried away on the wind.”
5


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And the Cham Santal of Tartary answered her:
“Oh, my Queen! I am thinking of riding soon to
Holy Russia with my army, and I shall take nine
cities and give them to my nine sons, and for myself
I shall bring back a costly fur coat.”
But the Queen said:
“You will not take nine cities or give them to your
nine sons, and you will not bring back for yourself a
costly fur coat!”
The Cham of Tartary answered in a rage:
“Oh, you old devil! You were dreaming and saw
yourself in your dream!”
And he struck her on her white face, and again
he struck her on the other cheek. He threw the
Queen down upon the brick floor, and threw her
down a second time, and said:
“T shall ride to Holy Russia; I shall take nine
cities, and give them to my nine sons; and for myself
I shall bring back a costly fur coat.”
Volga the Chief flew down from the window-ledge
to the ground and turned himself into a grey wolf and
jumped into the stable yard. He picked out all the
good horses and tore out the throat of every one.
Then Volga turned himself into a little ermine and
slipped into the armoury, where the Cham kept a great
stock of weapons for his men. Volga broke all the
tough bows, tore out the silken bow strings, destroyed
the sharp arrows, bit notches in the sharp swords, and
bent the steel maces into a bow. Then he turned
6


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
himself again into a little bird and soon flew back to
Kiev town, where he turned himself back into his own
shape, and was once more a goodly youth.
Volga came to his body-guard of good comrades.
“My brave comrades,” said he, “let us go to the
land of the Tartars!”
And they went to the land of the Tartars, and
they took all the Tartar army prisoners.


HERO PALES OF RUSSIA.
TT.
MIKULA THE VILLAGER’S SON.
EXT we come to the story of Mikula, the
N villager’s son, and how he meets with Volga
and joins his band of heroes. Young Volga
had an uncle who was a prince in the land, and the
prince gave Volg4 for his own three towns, and the
towns were to pay him a yearly tribute, and so he set
out with his body-guard of brave youths to collect this
tribute.
Volga set out, and as he rode through the free and
open plain he heard a ploughman in the open field.
The ploughman’s plough could be heard scraping over
the ground and scrunching over the stones, but the
ploughman and his plough were out of sight on the
boundless plain. Volgi rode towards the ploughman
all day from morning till evening with his brave body-
guard, but he could not come up with the ploughman.
And Volga rode on the whole of another day, another
day from morning till evening, but he could not come
up with the ploughman. The ploughman was ploughing
the field and still drove on. The ploughman’s plough
scraped on and the ploughshare creaked over the
stones, but still Volg& could not come within sight of
him, and on the third day Volga and his comrades
8


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
rode from morning till midday, and at midday they
came up with the ploughman in the open field. The
ploughman was ploughing in the field, and on he
drove. From edge to edge he swept the long furrows.
When he reached the edge of the field he could
not see the other edge. He cast out the stumps
and stones, and all the large stones he piled up in
a trench.
The ploughman had a light bay mare, and the
stock of his plough was of maple wood. His mare was
harnessed with ropes of silk.
When Volga came up with the ploughman he
spoke to him and said:
“God help thee, good ploughman, to plough the
field and till the ground, and to do thy labour, to
sweep the furrows from edge to edge of the field,
and to turn out the stumps and stones from the
ground.”
The ploughman looked at Volgaé and said:
“Here comes Volga with his brave body-guard! Yes,
I need the help of God to do my peasant’s work! Is
it far thou goest, Volgd4, and whither dost thou go
with thy brave body-guard?”
“Well, good ploughman, I am going to town to
collect the tribute. First I go to Gurchevitz town, and
next I am going to Orechovitz, and then to a third
town, Krestyanovitz.”
“Well, my Lord Volga,” said the ploughman, “I
was in town not long since on my bay mare, and I
brought away with me from the town two bags of
9


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
salt, only two bags of salt, each of fourteen hundred
pounds weight, and the peasants there are all thieves;
they asked me for threepence for toll. But I had my whip
for the journey, and I paid them their toll with my whip.”
“Now come with me, good ploughman,” said Volga,
“come and join my body-guard!”
And the good ploughman straightway unfastened
his ropes of silk, took his mare from the plough, and
got on her back.
Volga’s body-guard were all mounted on their good
horses and were setting off, but the ploughman stopped
Volga and said:
“Now, Volga, I left the plough in the furrow;
would it not be better to pull the plough out of the
ground and shake the earth from the ploughshare,
and throw the plough behind the broom bush? Not for
fear of any passing travellers who might take it, but
on account of the good-for-nothings in the village
who might meddle with my plough.”
Young Volga ordered five strong young men out
of his brave body-guard to pull the plough out of the
ground, to shake the earth from the ploughshare, and
throw the plough behind the broom bush. The five
strong young men rode up to the plough of maple
wood, they turned the plough about by the shaft, but
could not pull the plough out of the ground, or shake
the earth from the ploughshare, and throw the plough
behind the broom bush.
Young Volga then sent from his brave body-guard
a whole half-score to pull the plough out of the ground,
10


ZW Me Oe
OS sa OPS WE <
Moaoson Mii yaa GoAANHNOBHYS.




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
to shake the earth from the ploughshare, and throw
the plough behind the broom bush. They turned the
plough round by the shaft, but could not pull the
plough out of the ground, or shake the earth from the
ploughshare, or throw the plough behind the broom
bush.
Young Volgi then sent his whole brave body-
guard to pull the plough out of the ground, shake the
earth from the ploughshare, and throw the plough
behind the broom bush, but, though they tried their
hardest, they could not pull the plough out of the
ground, or shake the earth from the ploughshare, and
throw the plough behind the broom bush. Then the
good ploughman came riding up upon his light bay
mare to this plough of maple wood. He took hold of
the plough with one hand, pulled the plough out of
the ground, shook the earth from the ploughshare, and
threw the plough into the broom bush.
Again they all mounted their good steeds and rode
on. The ploughman’s mare went on at a trot, but
Volga’s horse had to gallop to try to get up to the
ploughman’s mare, and Volgd’s horse was left behind.
Volga began to wave his cap, and he shouted:
“Stop, good ploughman. If that mare of yours were
a horse, I would give five hundred for that mare.”
The ploughman answered him:
“Stupid is Volga, the son of Svyatoslav. I took the
mare as a foal from the dam, and I paid five hundred
for that mare when she was a foal. If the mare were
a horse, she would be priceless!”
13


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Said Volga, the son of Svyatoslav:
“ Here, good ploughman-farmer, by what name art
thou called? What is thy father’s name, and whence
comest thou?”
And the ploughman answered him:
“Well now, Volgd, son of Svyatoslav, I plough the
fields for rye, I build my ricks, I stack my corn, I lead it
home; when I’ve brought it home, I grind the corn, I
split wood, and I brew beer. When I have brewed
beer I give it to the peasants to drink. And the peasants
call me Young Mikula, the villager’s son!”
14


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
III.
SVYATOGOR.
HERE was once a great Russian Hero who was
so big and strong that no one could stand up
against him, and he fancied that with his great
strength he could do anything.
One day he made up his mind to go out for a ride
on the plain, the great open plain in Russia, where one
can ride for miles without seeing anything but the
long waving feather grass.
He saddled and bridled his good horse, got upon his
back and rode out on the open plain. In his heart he
was glad; yes, he was glad—yes, and overflowing with
strength, and he said to himself:
“So strong do I feel that if I could find something
to take hold of I could lft up the whole world!”
He rode on a long way and presently saw another
man on horseback ahead of him. The man did not look
round, but he let fall a small wallet such as a man
often carries across his shoulder or across his horse.
Svyatogor saw it lying on the road and tried to push
it away with the end of his whip; it did not move.
He bent over and touched the wallet with his fingers,
but he could not move it. He stooped down from his
15


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
horse and grasped the wallet with his hand, but he
could not lift it.
“Many years have I journeyed upon this earth,”
said he, “but never have I come upon so strange a
thing. Such a wonder have I never seen. A little
wallet, a bag, that will not be pushed away, that cannot
be moved out of the way, and that cannot be lifted
up!”
The hero got off his good horse, stooped and
grasped the bag with both hands; he lifted it a little
higher than his knees, but he sank down into the
earth as far as his knees, and, not tears, but blood,
ran down his white face, and as he sank down he
could not rise again.
The man who was riding in front turned round
and rode back to him.
Svyatogoér asked:
“What was in that wallet to make it so heavy?”
The man answered:
“The weight of the whole world.”
“Who art thou?” asked Svyatogor.
“T am Mikula, the villager’s son.”
16


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
IV.
SVYATOGOR AND ILYA OF MUROM.
EAR the town of Mutrom in Russia there lived
long ago a farmer called Ivan, with his wife
and family. He and his wife and his sons and
daughters worked hard in the fields, all but one son,
Ilya, who was always sitting at home. For thirty
years Ilyd had been sitting at home because he could
use neither hands nor feet.
One day he was sitting by the window as usual,
when two wandering pilgrims came passing by. They
were both too lame and old to work, but they had
made the pilgrimage to the Holy Land and now walked
about the country singing psalms and living upon the
food and money that kind folk gave them. They saw
Ilya at his window and called out:
“Tlyi! Ilya of Muirom, open wide the gate for the
pilgrims; let us into thy house.”
Ilya of Mtirom answered :
“Well now, good pilgrims, I cannot open the gate,
for I have been sitting here these thirty years. I can
use neither hands nor feet.”
Again the pilgrims called to him:
“QO Ilya, rise up upon thy nimble feet. Open
wide the gates and let the pilgrims in to visit thee in
thy house.”
17


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Ily& stood up upon his feet, as though nothing ailed
him. He opened wide the gates and let the pilgrims
into the house. They came in, crossing themselves like
good Russians, and bowed low when they were in the
room.
“Pray give us a drink, Ily4,” they said.
Ily4 brought them a large bowl of honey drink;
it held about a pailful and a half, and he offered it to
the pilgrims. They took it and drank, and then offered
it to Ily4. He drank the bowlful and felt a rush of
warmth throughout his body, his hero’s heart burned
within him.
“What dost thou feel, O Ilya?” asked the pilgrims.
Ilya bowed to the ground before the pilgrims and
answered :
“T feel great strength within me.”
“Bring another drink, Ily4,” said the pilgrims.
And Ilya brought another cupful, and offered it to
the pilgrims. They offered it to Ilydé, and Iya
emptied the cup without drawing breath.
“How dost thou feel now, Ilya4?” asked the
pilgrims.
“TI feel great strength, but only half as much as
before,” answered he.
Then the wandering pilgrims said:
“O Ilya, thou wilt be a great hero, and it is not
written that thou shouldst die in battle. Fight thou
with all the heroes and the bold warrior women of the
plain, and defend thyself against them; only go not
out to fight with the hero Svyatogor, for with his
18
a


WAS — eS —————— = Re
—_—_———_—_— SS
TMi le
{
i
ieeeheg,
Cae }
sq Wey
ee ‘fy
mn)
WIPE ’ i FF F Zz G ¥
tis, 472) . 4 La A
ZO PN UMTS gz Lh




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
strength he could carry the earth; and fight not with
the hero Samson, for he has upon his head seven hairs
of angels; also fight not with the race of Mikula, for
damp Mother Earth loves him. Neither go after Volga,
son of Svyatoslav; he will overcome thee, not by force,
but by craft and wisdom. Now rise up, O Ilyd, mount
thy horse, and ride out into the free and open plain.
Buy the first foal thou seest with its dam, and in
three months’ time thou mayst put on the saddle.
Feed him on millet and maize; walk him about for
three months, then keep him for three nights in the
garden, and roll the foal three mornings in the dew.
Lead him to a high fence, and when he will readily
leap the fence both from this side and the other, then
ride him where thou wilt, he will carry thee.”
Then the pilgrims vanished, and presently Ilya’s
father and mother came in from their work in the
fields. His brother and sisters came in also from their
work, and his father and mother were glad indeed to
see that Ilya could walk as if nothing had ever ailed him.
Then from joy they became sad again, and said:
“Thirty years has Ily4 been sitting on the bench
as if he had neither hands nor feet!”
And Ilyé said to his father:
“Where have you been working to-day, father?”
But his parents only said:
“Glory to Thee, O Lord! Thirty years has Ilya
been sitting by the stove, and was he not without
hands or feet?”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And Ilya asked again:
“But you, father and mother, where have you
been working on the farm?”
“Well, Ilya,” answered his father, “we are working
in the field by the stream; we are clearing it for
ploughing. It is the field three fields from home.”
After they had dined Ilyd said to his parents:
“Now, dear father and mother, take me to the
water meadow. Show me my bit of work.”
And his parents took him down to the water
meadow, and Ilya said:
“Show me how far you will plough here,” and
they showed him the boundary and sat down to rest.
But Ily& seized the brushwood by handfuls and
cut it down by the roots and threw it all on to a
pile on the edge of the field. And he worked so
hard and so fast that the field was cleared in a
quarter of the time that it would have taken his
father to finish the work. The father and mother were
asleep, for they were tired by the long morning’s work,
but they awoke when Ilya came towards them, saying:
“Come, father and mother, is not your field well
cleared for the ploughing? Now I must say good-bye
to home!”
Then Ily& saddled his good horse and put on the
bridle, and his father and mother gave him their
farewell blessing.
He rode away through the open plain till at last
22


5 . prays
cua ia I oi Soa aa Ullage
N A
E i) Styne = nchanter's if
Palace. , cual al
=e
SO ee Oe bak Ke t
Loo
a River Desna er. -
LY Nightingale's
WHET Nest.
4 4A Oi fis hiccse
| The JOURNEYS of ena ae
ILYA of MUROM.
Black Sea. Qe stip
Sens


i Pie Ue ta)
ia


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he came to a high mountain. When he reached the
high mountain he climbed up it and then lay down to
rest, and he slept for twelve days the sleep of a hero.
When he awoke he saw at a distance a white tent
standing beneath a tree. He mounted his horse again
and rode a long way through the plain towards the
white tent. This tent stood beneath the shade of a
great green oak tree upon another hill. In the tent
was a great bed seventy feet long and forty-two feet
wide. Ilya tied up his horse to the oak tree and lay
down upon that hero’s bed, and went to sleep. Now
the sleep of a hero is sound, and Ilya slept for three
days and three nights.
On the third day his good horse heard a terrible
noise from the north. Mother Earth rocked, the dark
forest shook, the rivers overflowed their steep banks.
Ilya’s good horse struck the ground with his hoofs, but
could not waken Ilya of Murom. At last the horse
spoke to him in a human voice:
“O Ilya of Muirom! thou knowest not that danger
is near thee. The hero Svyatogér is coming to his
tent. Let me loose that I may flee across the open
plain, and thou mayest climb up into the green oak
tree.”
Ily4 untied his horse’s bridle and set the good horse
free to gallop across the plain; and then he climbed
up into the oak tree. From the oak tree he saw the
hero Svyatogoér coming on his great horse. The hero
was taller than a standing forest, and his head nearly
touched a moving cloud. On his shoulder he carried
25


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
a great chest of glass. He came down from his horse
and placed the chest on the ground and opened it
with a golden key. Out of the chest came the hero’s
wife. So lovely was she that no such beauty had ever
been seen or heard of in the whole white world.
Very tall she was and elegant, and delicately did
she walk. She had eyes like the eyes of a bright
falcon, eyebrows of black sable, and waving black hair.
As soon as she came out of the great chest she set to
work to lay the table for her husband’s dinner. She
spread a bright chequered table-cloth and took from
the chest a bottle of honey drink and a cup and
sweetmeats full many, and placed them upon the
chequered cloth.
After he had eaten and drunk, Svyatogér lay down
to sleep on his great bed in the tent, but his wife
went to walk on the open plain. She caught sight of
Ilya in the oak tree and would have him to come down
and talk to her. When her husband suddenly woke
up she put Ilya into her husband’s pocket to hide
him. Svyatogor stood up and put his wife back into
the glass chest and lifted it on to his shoulder again.
He called up his horse and got upon his back and set
off to ride, but soon the horse stumbled, and Svyatogor
was vexed and asked why he was stumbling.
“This morning,” said the horse in a human voice,
“T was carrying a hero and a hero’s wife, but
now I am carrying two heroes as well as the hero’s
wife.”
26


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Svyatogor looked round and saw no one, but putting
his hand into his pocket there he found LIlyd. The
hero asked Ilya’ whence he came. Ilya told him the
truth, and Svyatogor was exceeding angry and killed
his wife for trying to deceive him.
That Llya had dealt straightly pleased the hero
Svyatogor, and there arose a great friendship between
them. Svyatogoér exchanged crosses with Ilydé in token
of friendship, and called Ily4 his younger brother. He
taught Llya all the handling of weapons, how to use
his mace and his bow and arrows and spear in
fighting, and also all the ways of travel of the heroes.
Ilya had called up his good horse from the plain by a
loud whistle, and the two heroes, the old Svyatogér
and the younger Ilya of Murom, rode on _ together
through the open plain till they came to a great tomb
built of stone. Upon the tomb was written these
words :—
“He who is fated to lie in this tomb will exactly
fit it.”
Ilya lay down in the tomb, but it was too long and
too wide for him, and at once he sprang out of it.
The giant hero Svyatogér lay down there, and the
tomb just fitted him.
“The tomb is just made for me,” said the hero.
“Take the lid of the tomb, ya, and cover me.”
Ily4 answered:
) 4


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“T will not take up the lid of the tomb, O, my
big brother. I will not cover thee. This is a foolish
jest of thine—thou wilt bury thyself.”
And Svyatogér took the lid and covered himself up
in the tomb, but when he tried to lift the lid off again
he could not move it. He struggled and strove to lift
it, but could do nothing. Then he called to Ilya:
“O, my young brother! It seems that my fate
has found me. I cannot raise the lid. Try thou to lift
iii,
Tly&4 of Mutrom tried hard to raise the cover, but
what could he do?
Then said Svyatogor the hero:
“Take my sword of steel and strike across the lid
of the tomb.”
Ilya tried to lift Svyatogor’s great sword, but could
not—it was too heavy for him—and he had to say:
“T cannot lift thy sword, O, my brother!”
Svyatogor then called to him:
“My little brother, bend down to this small chink
in the tomb, and I will breathe upon thee the spirit of
a hero.”
Ily&4 bent down to the chink and Svyatogér the
hero breathed upon him his hero’s spirit. Llya felt
that his former strength had become three times as
great as before. He took the sword of steel and struck
a blow across the lid of the tomb. By this blow
sparks were struck, but on the place where he struck
the lid there grew a band of iron.
The hero Svyatogér called to him again, saying:
28


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“My young brother, I am suffocating; try again
to strike the lid lengthwise.”
Ilya struck the cover lengthwise with the great
sword, but again where he struck there grew a band
of iron.
Then the hero Svyatogér spoke to him, saying:
“My young brother, I am suffocating. Stoop down to
the chink and I will breathe upon thee and will give
thee all my great strength.”
But Llya answered :
“Tf I had all thy strength, O, my big brother,
Earth would not bear me.”
Then said the hero Svyatogor:
“Thou hast done well, little brother, in that thou
didst not do my last bidding. I should have breathed
upon thee with the breath of the dead, and thou wouldst
have lain dead by me. Now, farewell; take my sword
of steel, but lead my good horse to my tomb; none
but I must own that horse.”
Then came from the chink the last breath of the
hero. Ilyd said farewell to his friend, girded on his
sword of steel, but left the hero’s horse by his master’s
tomb, and he rode away into the free and open plain.
29


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
x.
ILYA OF MUROM AND NIGHTINGALE
THE ROBBER.
The green oak bows not down to the earth,
Leaves of paper do not grow.
LYA had made up his mind to go to Kiev town
to seek service with the gracious Prince Vladimir,
but before setting out on that long journey
he wished to see his father again and ask for his
blessing, so he rode back to Murom and to his old
home. He found his old father there and greeted him,
saying :
“Come thou, my own dear Father! I am here
to ask for thy blessing. I go to glorious, royal Kiev
town to pray at the sanctuary of Kiev and to pledge
myself to Vladimir the Prince, to serve him in faith
and in truth, and to uphold the Christian faith.”
The old farmer Ivan blessed Ilya and said:
“TI give thee my blessing for the good work, but for
evil work no blessing I give. Go thou on the right
road, and do no harm to any woman whether she be
Christian or Tartar.”
Ilya of Murom bowed to the earth before his father,
and said farewell to his mother and his sisters and
brothers, and then he mounted his good horse and rode
30


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
through the open plain. With his whip he struck his
horse on the curved hind quarter and his restive steed
was wroth and suddenly sprang from the earth and
bounded higher than an upright tree, almost as high as
a moving cloud. At the first bound he passed twelve
miles, at the second bound he came to a well. By the
well Ilya cut down a green oak tree, and beside the
well he built a small chapel, and upon the chapel he
wrote his name,
ILYA OF MUROM, SON OF IVAN,
so that if some strong and mighty hero should ride
that way, he should know the name of the builder of
that chapel.
At the third bound Ilyd’s horse brought him to the
town of Chérnigov. Near Chérnigov there stood a
countless host of Tartars, and at their head were three
Princes, each with the strength of forty thousand. On
seeing this vast horde the hero’s heart grew hot within
him, and he could not control his longing to fight.
His heart was filled with fires, and it burned too as
if scorched by frost. Then he spoke and said:
“T desire not to go against my father’s wish, or
knowingly to disregard his command.”
Then he took in his hand his battle-sword and
taught it to take a walk through the army. Where
he turned, it opened out a street, and when he turned
round there was a great open space. Ilyd4 made his
way to the three princes, and spoke thus to them:
31


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“Come, my three king’s sons! Shall I take you away
as prisoners, or shall I cut off your warlike heads?
If I take you away as prisoners, I must travel over
roads that I know not and must carry bread, but if
I take off your heads the kingly race will be destroyed.
If you will go home to your own country, you will
spread such report of me that it will be known all
over Russia, and you will tell it everywhere that in
Holy Russia there are strong and mighty heroes.”
The Governor of Chérnigov saw Ilya and said:
“This Lord has vanquished our tyrant and cleansed
our glorious city of Chérnigov,”’ and he spoke to his
princes and nobles and said:
“Go ye and call in this goodly hero to eat bread
and salt with me.”
And the princes and nobles came forth to greet
Ilya of Murom and said:
“Come now, thou stalwart and goodly hero, and
tell us by what honoured name thou art called, and
what is thy renowned father’s name?”
“They call me by the name of Ilya, but I am
honoured as the son of Ivan,” said Ilya.
“Come, Ily4 of Mutrom,” said the princes and nobles,
“come to our Governor, he sends us to invite thee to
eat bread and salt with him.”
But Ily&4 wished to be on the way to Kiev and
answered with little ceremony:
“T will not come to your Governor; I wish not to
eat bread and salt with him. Show me the straight
road to glorious, royal Kiev town.”
32


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
So they had to let him go on his way, and they
showed him the straight road to Kiev across the open
plain.
Farther, farther upon on the open plain waves the
feather grass in the breeze, and there upon the open
plain, among old folk, mothers and men, rode the Old
Cossack, Ily’ of Mtrom, and the horse he rode was
like a fierce wild beast and he himself like a bright
falcon.
Now the old hero carried no money, only seven
thousand golden ducats had he with him, and of small
money, forty thousand pieces. And the horse the hero
rode was priceless. Why was the hero’s horse priceless?
Because these was no price for the horse.
When he came to a river he looked for no ford.
Now the river was a full mile wide, but the good
steed leapt from bank to bank. Then Ilya saw a village
near by and the villagers—brigands, as we say in our
Russian tongue—rode out after the hero. They swept
round him and tried to rob him, tried to part him
from his life and soul.
Then said Ilya of Murom, son of Ivan:
“Oh come, brother villagers, no reason have ye to
kill an old man like me. And ye shall take nothing
from the old man.”
He took from his saddle his tough bow and
brought out from his quiver a sharp arrow. He bent
his bow and fitted the arrow to the silken string, and
33
D


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
shot—not at the village folk—brigands though they
were—for he would have been loth to slay them, but
he shot at the green oak tree; and the bow-string
sang in the tough bow, the villagers fell from their
horses, the arrow struck the crackling green oak tree
and shattered the oak into chips and shavings. By
this heroic deed of thunder the brigand villagers were
filled with fear, and for five hours they lay without
sense, and Ilya made sport of them.
“Come, come, good youths, you village brigands!
Why do you lie half the night there upon the damp
earth? Why go off to sleep and sleep half the night?
On my way here I passed many people both on
horseback and on foot; you have let many a good
chance escape you.”
The goodly youths stood up upon their nimble feet
and threw themselves at Ilya’s feet and said:
“OQ thou brave hero! come and join our band and
be thou our chieftain.”
The good hero, Ilya of Murom, answered them:
“T desire not to join your band; I am on my way
to Kiey town, to Vladimir the Prince, to help him,
and to fight and defend him.”
The bold hero rode on through the open plain till
he came to a pillar of white oak. On the pillar this
writing was written:
“To ride straight on—only five hundred miles,
But making a round—seven hundred miles.”
34


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Ily4 looked at this writing and said:
“Tf I ride straight, I shall cease to live; this way
I can neither ride nor walk nor fly. Nightingale the
Robber sits in his nest upon the seven oaks, and the
robber-dog will seize me at the seventh mile.”
Ilya stood still to think what he should do.
“The straight horse-road is broken up, the little
bridge of white hazel is broken down. It would be no
honour to me, or glory to my knighthood to ride by
that roundabout way. It is better, to ride by the
straight road.”
At once he got down from his good steed; with
one hand he led his horse, while with the other he
put planks across the stream for a bridge—that bridge
of white hazel.
The straight road he mended, and he rode on till
he came near the clump of seven oak trees upon which
Nightingale the Robber had built his great nest.
Nightingale the Robber was sitting upon his nest
of twisted boughs upon the seven oak trees, and Ilya
rode up to the oak trees. The robber-dog tried to
seize him just as he had come to the seventh mile,
and Nightingale the Robber roared like a wild aurochs,
and the villain whistled like a nightingale, and the
robber-dog howled like a dog.
And at these sounds Ilya’s good steed fell upon
his knees with terror at the roar of the aurochs,
35


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and the whistle of the nightingale, and the dog-like
howling of the robber-dog. Ilya struck his horse
between the ears and also struck him upon the flank,
saying :
“Oh thou food for wolves, thou grass-bag! Hast
thou never heard the roar of an aurochs? and hast
thou never heard the whistle of a nightingale, and
the howling of a robber-dog ?”
The hero did not sit still but quickly bent his
strong bow, took a sharp arrow from his quiver and
shot the arrow at Nightingale the Robber as he sat
there in his nest on the seven oak trees. The arrow
hit Nightingale the Robber in the right eye and came
out at the left ear, and Nightingale the Robber fell
from his nest down upon the damp earth.
Then Ilya took Nightingale the Robber and tied
him to his Circassian stirrup and made him walk
beside the horse towards Kiev town. Presently they
came to the house of Nightingale the Robber. It was
a big house in a large yard, and round the yard was
a high iron fence with spikes on the railings, and upon
every spike was set the head of a hero; for Nightingale
the Robber killed all that passed that way.
Nightingale’s children caught sight of their father
and called out:
“Look! father is bringing a man.”
And Nightingale’s young wife looked from the
window and said:
36


tal HF SS =) |
mm ip Bs we
a tit x S=—— z = i a
a . | | B}
( ) i PE ZZ
aN tts | es her pg
HEA a \ vA oe Ley
: i Mt eit aed VA
Lf) ti HY "eiacraps Sy
seaeustlesunts at { GA
ti
PATE hibit ray VICE ae
Cr : PBANAS TO vent A past BONNHKA




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“A strange man is carrying off your dear father.”
And she called to some men who were idling about
the yard and said:
“Will you not take him from this wanderer on
the road? Is your dear father nothing to you? He
has fallen into the power of this horseman. It would
be better to take a cup full of red gold, and another
of pure silver, and a third cup full of round pearls.
Go now and offer them as a ransom. Speak to this
horseman and persuade him. Coax him and talk him
over so that he may release Nightingale.”
And they rushed into the house, and Nightingale’s
wife took the keys and went down to the deep vaults
where all Nightingale’s treasure was stored, and they
filled a cup full of red gold, and another with pure
silver, and a third with round pearls, and they went
out to Ily4 with flattering words and tried to coax
him and talk him over, saying:
“O thou bold hero, good youth, give us back our
dear father and we will give thee gold and silver!”
Ily& received these messengers and talked to them
thus :
“Look here, brothers, you who work for gain,
I will not give you your dear father; he would only
turn brigand again and rob the travellers passing this
”
way.
And Ilya rode on to Kiev town with Nightingale
the Robber by his side, still tied to the stirrup so that
39


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he could not run away. LTlyé hurried on, for he would
fain be at Kiev in time for the service on Haster
morning; but he could not get there in time. When
he reached Kiev he rode into the wide courtyard of
the Prince’s palace. He tied up his good horse to the
gold ring on a carven pillar, but did not take off
either the saddle or the bridle, and he left Nightingale
the Robber still tied to the stirrup.
Then Ily&4 walked quickly through the new
entrance, through the guard room and into the hall.
There he crossed himself like a good Russian, and
made his bow as he came into the hall. The steward
of Vladimir the Prince he greeted, and asked him:
“Where is the Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev?”
“Prince Vladimir has gone to Mass,’ was the
answer.
Ilya sat down on the plain wooden bench to wait,
and in a short time Prince Vladimir came in with his
nobles and attendants from the Haster service.
Then they all gave greetings one to the other, and
each hero greeted the other, and Vladimir spoke to
Ilya and said:
“All hail to thee, brave youth, I know not thy
name or thy father’s name. Art thou a Tsar or
a Tsar’s son? Art thou a king or a king’s son?”
Ilya answered and said:
“T am from the town of Murom. I am the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom.”
And they all sat down at the table to eat bread,
40


i ie ee
‘ii wu ‘is H| ie R A fs y Y: :
ak 2 ATT | Nani ahi
i t on, fue ; ANT mie ye 0 - AN
ne yin Lt iW oe vn — | uid SE ey ie 7
Slam, Cal nae A HI
Mokyaas HAGA My)
i ls)
N | ; "g } KO TOPOAY ls i h i ee RieBY: = ===




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and they carved and ate white swans, and Ily4 began
to talk and to boast of what he had done.
“TY am a brave hero, I have been riding through the
eve of Easter Day. I would fain have been in time for
the Easter Mass, but I could not get here in time for
Kaster morning, for the hour was past. I rode here by
the straight road, and when I reached the green oaks,
Nightingale the Robber was sitting upon the seven
oaks. That ill-doer used to seize upon every one for
seven miles round. When I came near the oaks
Nightingale roared like a wild aurochs, and the villain
whistled like a nightingale, and the robber-dog howled
like a dog. Then my good horse fell upon his knees
with fear, but I took out my tough bow, set the sharp
arrow, and shot Nightingale the Robber. I shot the
villain through the right eye, and the arrow came out
by the left ear. Then Nightingale fell upon the damp
earth, and [ took the robber and fastened him
to my Circassian stirrup and brought the villain with
me.”
Vladimir the Prince looked at Ilya and said:
“Tt seems to me, my bold youth, that there must be a
big tavern in this country! Hast thou been drinking
strong drink? Art thou not making empty boasts,
good hero?”
Ilya’s wrath grew hot within him, and angrily he
said:
“Thou it is who art the fool, O Prince of royal
Kiev! I have Nightingale the Robber here, tied to my
Circassian stirrup.”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Then all sprang up and rushed out, hurried and
stumbled against each other as they ran out to see
Nightingale the Robber. They all spoke and shouted
together and called out to him:
“QO thou Nightingale the Robber! Roar, O
Nightingale, like an aurochs! Thou evil doer, whistle
like a nightingale! O thou robber-dog, howl like a
dog!”
Nightingale the Robber looked up and said:
“With you I neither eat nor drink, and I will not
obey you.”
At once the crowd of courtiers turned back to the
hall and came to Ilya4 of Murom, bowed low to him
and craved their boon:
“OQ tIly4 of Mutrom, we beg thee to make
Nightingale the Robber roar lke an aurochs, and
make the villain whistle like a nightingale, and make
the robber-dog howl like a dog.”
And Ilya spoke to the Prince and said:
“O Vladimir, Prince of royal Kiev! Nightingale’s
lips are now sealed together and his mouth is filled with
dried blood, for my arrow went through his right eye
and it came out by the left ear. Pray let a bowl of
strong drink be poured out for him—a bowl weighing half
a hundredweight, a bowl holding four gallons, and let
it be given to Nightingale.”
And they poured him out a bowl of strong drink—
a bowl weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding
four gallons; and they took it to Nightingale the
44


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Robber. He took the bowl in one hand, drank off
the bowl of strong drink at one draught, and spoke
these words:
“Pour out another bowl of strong beer—a bowl
weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding four
gallons, and pour out a third bowl of sweet mead—
a bowl weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding
four gallons.”
And they poured out a bowlful of strong beer, and
they poured out a bowlful of sweet mead and brought
both to Nightingale the Robber. He took the bowl
with one hand and drank off the bowlful at one
draught. And then Nightingale the Robber was
drunken, and Ilya of Murom said to him:
“Now, Nightingale! Roar, thou robber, hke an
aurochs; whistle, O villain, like a nightingale; and
howl, O dog, like a dog.”
And Nightingale the Robber roared like an aurochs
the villain whistled like a nightingale, and the robber-
dog howled like a dog.
Princes and nobles all lay for dead, but Vladimir
the Prince of royal Kiev stood up straight and went
up to Ilya, for the Prince had a boon to ask:
“Silence Nightingale the Robber, lest he whistle
again like a nightingale, and my nobles leave me
here alone.”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
ie
THE THREE WAYS.
NE day Ilya set off on his good horse for a ride.
He rode a long way through the open plain
till he came to the Burning Stone. Three
lengths beyond the stone there were three paths
leading this way and that from the Burning Stone,
and upon the stone was written:
“Who goes by the first path will be killed.
Who goes by the second path will find marriage.
Who goes by the third path will become rich.”
He stopped to consider:
“By which path shall I go? Why should a bold
hero want to be rich? Why should I want to marry ?
I will take the way to be killed.”
So he took that way and rode on for three hours,
and he rode three hundred miles, and then he came
to a hill, and at that hill, that high hill, brigands
began to come up, and there came up forty thousand
brigands. They began to defy our bold hero, and the
brave Cossack spoke and hailed them:
“Come, you forty thousand robbers! What will
you take from me, the bold hero? I have not many
46


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
chests of uncounted gold, I have no beautiful young
wives, I have no fine clothes, I have nothing but a
good horse, a good horse which cost three hundred ;
on the horse are trappings worth five hundred; on
myself a hero’s gear worth a cool thousand.”
When he drew his iron mace of three tons weight,
he began to defy the robbers, and he killed the forty
thousand robbers.
Then the bold hero turned back, and when he
reached the Burning Stone he altered the writing
thus:
“Tf thou goest by this road thou wilt not be
killed.”
And he said:
“T shall go by the road to marriage.”
So Lly4 took the second path and rode on for just
three hundred miles. He rode on always through the
plain, that open plain, through the open plain, the green
meadow, through those open plains and through green
meadows till he came to a wonderful and a strange
thing. If we called it a town it would be too small;
if we called it a village it would seem too large, but
there stood a palace built of white stone. When Ilya
reached the broad palace yard there came a most
beautiful young princess from the palace of white
stone. She came to meet the brave hero and took him
by his white hands, kissed him with her sweet lips,
47


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
led him into the white stone palace, and made him
sit down at the oaken table, where a feast was spread.
Ily4 ate and drank in plenty, and stuffed himself the
whole day long till evening, when he rose up from
the oaken table and spoke to the princess and said:
“OQ thou enchanting and beautiful lady, where
are thy warm sleeping chambers? Where are the
beds of carved wood? Where are the soft feather
beds? I am an old man and weary, and I would fain
sleep.”
And the princess led him to a warm chamber, but
the old man stood by the bed and shook his head and
sald :
“Much have I travelled through Holy Russia, but
so strange a thing have I never seen. It seems to me
that that bed is a trap.”
Suddenly he seized the princess by her white
hands and threw her against the brick wall against
which the bed stood. The bed of carved wood turned over
and the princess fell down into a deep dungeon below.
The old Cossack walked out of the palace, and out-
side he found the door of the deep dungeon. Then he
took the golden keys, went on and unlocked the deep
dungeon and set free many goodly youths and brave,
and many strong and mighty heroes, but the beautiful
and wicked enchantress was killed. And all the rich
treasure which Ilydé found there in that white stone
palace he bestowed on the good youths and brave, and
on the strong and mighty heroes. But that white
stone palace he gave to the flames.
48


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And then our bold hero rode back again, and
when he came to the Burning Stone he again altered
the graven letters and wrote:
“By that way I went—I was not married.”
“T go,” said he, “by the third path, where one will
become rich.”
And on he rode for three hours, three hundred
miles he rode, and again he rode through the
plain, the open plain, the meadow, the green meadow,
to a place where there were sunk deep pits in the
ground, all piled up with red gold—red gold, pure
silver, and fine round pearls.
Ilya looked at the gold and said:
“What has a bold hero to do with these riches,
with this treasure of much uncounted gold?”
He began to consider: and then he took enough of
this treasure in this plain, this open plain, to build
an abbey for prayers to God. He built a church, a
minster church, ordered the singing of psalms and the
ringing of bells, and then L[lya said:
“Let him whose treasure it was go and look for it!”
And then the bold hero turned back again;
again he rode to that Burning Stone; again he wrote
beneath that inscription :
“Though I rode by that path, I became not rich.”
49


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
VII.
ILYA OF MUROM AND KING KALIN.
N the palace of the gracious Prince Vladimir, in
I royal Kiev town, a great feast of honour was
spread for many princes and nobles and for the
strong and mighty heroes and their bold followers,
men of the plains, and for the stranger merchants and
traders.
The Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir himself, took his
pleasure there, and gave rich gifts to his guests. To
some he gave towns, and to others he gave small
towns, to some he gave villages, and to others he gave
hamlets, and to Ily&4 of Mutrom he gave a coat of
marten fur with a collar of sable.
But Ilya received not the fur coat as an honour;
he received it without respect and praised it not. He
took the fur coat into the kitchen and dragged the
fur coat about the kitchen floor. Yes, and thus he
talked to the fur coat:
“Just as I drag about this fur coat, so will I drag
about that serpent, King Kalin, by his yellow curls.
And just as I pour strong drink upon this fur coat,
his heart shall pour forth his hot blood.”
And there was a dark-haired maid there, and she
reported the matter to Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, and
said :
50


Hy fff =
E= SS!
i\ —
i _—— EE —— ee ee a fa He
SS & cat
CES
-& } "> S
Ceith
\ a A
o- y
A ee \ ee
Fh \ \ {
\ \
\
~~ tt tt tt LA ———
ee = go gee On os
im = ee
2
BA COBPANB - TO EbIAS
NOYECTHOH MHZ.


ae
mee Ig ‘ sated in
Mi a } Kui ie
‘ AKU
Unt TMAH LC Heat (i
Wie aa
Diparimant


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“OQ Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir! When Iya of
Murom was in my kitchen, he dragged about the coat
of marten fur; yes, and he said to the fur coat:
“Just as I drag this fur coat about, so will I drag
Prince Vladimir about by his yellow curly hair, and,
just as I pour strong drink upon the fur coat—yes, he
himself said it to the fur coat—the Fair Sun, Prince
Vladimir’s hot blood shall be poured out by my white
hands.”
And the Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, grew angry, and
he cried out in a loud voice:
“Come, my strong and mighty heroes, take Ilya
away to the dungeon, and put an iron grating there
and cover it over with logs of oak; yes, and bury him
with yellow sand.”
And the heroes came to [Ilya and said:
“Now, old Cossack, Tlya of Murom! Fair Sun
Vladimir, the Prince, has ordered us to put thee in a
deep dungeon, and to put an iron grating there, and
to cover it all over with oak logs, yes, and to bury
thee with yellow sand.”
And Ilya spoke to them and said:
“Now, what will ye do with me?”
And the heroes said:
“There is no sun in the heavens. Not one hero
in Holy Russia. Old Cossack, Lly4 of Mutrom! O
that we might take thee out of this bitter captivity!
Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, makes us turn pale.”
Then Ily& mounted his good horse and rode to
53


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Kiev town. He rode not into Kiev town, but he rode
to the deep dungeon.
He got down from his good horse, took off the
Circassian saddle, took off the braided bridle and let
his brown horse go where God willed.
Then Ily4 was let down into the deep dungeon,
and they put a grating over; they put it above him
and placed oak logs all over it, and buried him with
yellow sand.
Now the glorious Prince Vladimir had an only
daughter, and she saw that this was no small matter
that Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev town had put the
old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom, into that cold dungeon.
For it might be that he alone would be able to defend
the Faith and Country; that he alone might defend
Kiev town; that he alone might defend the Minster
Church, might protect Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia.
So the Princess caused a deep trench to be dug to
reach the dungeon of the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom.
And she commanded that false keys should be made;
and she sent people secretly to take to the cold
dungeon pillows of down and feather beds, and ordered
them to take warm coverlets too, and changes of
clothing, and to provide delicate food for the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom. But of this had Vladimir the
Prince no knowledge.
Now that dog, the Tartar King Kalin, burned to
54


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
be at Kiev town. Even royal Kiev town would he
destroy, and all the peasants he would cut to pieces,
and would burn down the churches of God, and also
cut off the heads of Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia.
And King Kalin, the dog, sent an envoy to royal
Kiev town and gave him a letter to deliver, and he
said to the envoy:
“When thou goest to royal Kiev town thou wilt
be an ambassador in Kiev town to the glorious Prince
Vladimir. Therefore go to the broad courtyard of the
Prince’s palace, and dismount not, but ride in on thy
good steed. After thou hast ridden through the court-
yard, then get down off thy steed and go to the palace
of white stone, and into the great hall of white stone
and into the dining hall. Go not humbly, but walk in
with a flourish through the five doors and take not
thy cap from thy head; but go up to the oaken table
and stand opposite Prince Vladimir and place the
letter upon the golden table before him, and speak to
Prince Vladimir and say:
“QO Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev town! Take
this letter which is sent to thee, and look at what is
written in the letter and see what is impressed upon
it. Clean all thy arrow-straight streets and the Courts
of the Prince in all the town of Kiev, and in all the
broad streets and alleys of the princedom place sweet
strong drinks, cask by cask standing close together,
for those who stand by the dog, King Kalin, with his
mighty warriors, in thy town of Kiev.”
55


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev took the letter sent
to him, broke the seal and looked at what was written
therein, and he saw what was in the letter: that he
was commanded to clean the arrow-straight streets
and the great Courts of the Prince, and to place
sweet strong drinks in all the broad streets and all
the alleys of the princedom.
Then Vladimir, the Prince of royal Kiev, saw that
this was no small matter, but a great one, and he sat
down in his writing-chair and a humble letter wrote he.
“Thou dog, King Kalin! Give me the space of
three years, give me three years and three months,
three months and also three days, that 1 may clean
the arrow-straight streets and the great Courts of the
Prince, and make sweet strong drinks and place them
in the town of Kiev and in all the broad streets and
in in all the alleys of the glorious princedom.”
The Prince sent off this humble letter to that dog,
King Kalin. And the dog, King Kalin gave him the
space of three years, three years and three months,
three months and three days. And day after day the
rain it rained, and week after week it ran like a river,
and the time went by—the three years and three
months and three days; and then came the dog, King
Kalin. Came beneath the town of Kiev with his great
army.
Then Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev began to walk
up and down, and tears of grief flowed from his bright
56


Mey | i Ny, 4 pit wo Syn a /; a
ey 1 Bayt
2 ie Ty SPE | Up Gy \\
{} Mg
Ad 4
YY : Yj) Vy Vif
LUM Udistigt ICL TT PEG “a NN]; athe Lm fy —
————
=
os
ae
Sete
_— *,.
i, PL ai Mh
nee, if eae we
| Y
A, 4/4 j | H ‘
. { A e . LZ con =>
| / (eC 5 : ,
y - \-/ “hk ™
‘ ?. Pa . i\ ny a ; 4 HH] sak | : : VL =
/ a \ i | F) 4 = | |
JJ] jy V a la) \}] LE | t +
| | > Lad f, \ | ORS oy IX
~d "4 iN //; ‘T/T &
; ; f 9 Why 4 | OA) f Lape yy) / i | ak J PX PS LAYS ///
i — UN a Sag Je AULA,
| AG ay 4 ny G ss? y sy | yf bs | | | nA /
Stee . A) » S/f | 2 o aA NW /
' ? 4 1p a fh) // | | hE neha
t i ay ex // we , 4 et
||} Palin, Paiiet) y // ae | Foouidle ore
{ { - jet ip 14 {- bs Aw ‘
' J a, \
| th —— Ahhh Wy Zz
rs => wa : oS \.—
heel 2 UDG, : if —< LZ A) Mee 4
‘ 3 > < yp f
ee ) oe oy = IY
KX) < =
SI . :
TIO SS > att 6 27 * Pe
Ps - KL r Z e - % = a "4
\ 77 : Cae parr ey ady we WH) Z ——s aR Km “SE
Ze =" ‘
° = mi ents a= _
ns S = = \ \ . gor / y
ly —~ ¥
a - 4
7 — 7
—_ = 7 ’
= aa a - a > — ~ - Lg
—e— aS —— a a +1 - : os ON "4 :
Jen : y‘e ' " ou
/ Hay A
‘ fv. ~ woe Abs a 4a
~ — a
fe PH
= & - : Be aa) | ——_—— a Oy Dh eh S ‘
: - te
= ;
—— : = 4
p > =a , ly
‘ “ oo ‘
- — a's rn i Reems en ee Lt | I =
or |||




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
eyes. With a kerchief of silk the Prince wiped his
eyes, and he spoke these words:
“The old Cossack, Iya of Murom, lives no longer,
none is there to defend the Faith and Country; none
to defend the Church of God and Kiev town; none to
protect Vladimir the Prince and the Princess Apraxia!”
Then came to him his dear daughter, and spoke to
him these words:
“Q my dear father, Prince Vladimir of royal
Kiev, the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, is yet alive, he
is alive in the cold dungeon.”
Then Prince Vladimir quickly brought the golden
keys and went to the cold dungeon, and soon unlocked
the doors and opened the iron grating. And there was
the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, sitting there in the
dungeon, reading the Holy Gospels.
And there were down pillows and feather beds, and
warm coverlets had been brought there, and changes
of apparel and delicate food provided.
And the Prince took Ilya by his white hands and
by his golden ring, and led him from the cold dungeon,
brought him to his white stone palace, and placed him
near himself. He kissed Ily4 and welcomed him, and
invited him to the oaken table, and gave him sugar
sweetmeats to eat and drink made from honey. Then
spoke the Prince to Ilya these words:
“Old Cossack, Ilya of Mtirom! ‘Taken is our town
of Kiev. The dog, King Kalin, has surrounded Kiev
59


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
town with his great army. Do thou defend our Faith
and Country and glorious Kiev town, and defend the
Church of the Mother of God, and Vladimir thy Prince
and the Princess Apraxia.”
Then the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, went out
from the palace of white stone, and walked through
the town of Kiev to his dwelling of white stone. He
asked for his beloved steed, and went to the broad
yard and into the stable, and looked at his good war
horse. And Ilya said:
“My beloved steed! My trusty and unchanging ser-
vant! Well hast thou been looked to, my hero horse.”
He kissed him on his sweet mouth, led the
good horse from the stable stall and into the fine
broad courtyard; and then the old Cossack began to
saddle his good horse there. Upon the horse he put a
saddle-cloth, and upon the saddle-cloth he laid a cloth
of felt; now the saddle-cloth was of silk, and upon
the saddle-cloth he laid another cloth, and then the
Circassian saddle. But the Circassian saddle did not
hold firmly, and [Ilya fastened it by twelve girths of
silk, and he drew them up with steel pins. And he
fixed on stirrups of steel and buckles of red gold—not
for show, but for heroic strength. Drawn up are the
girths of silk, and they break not; steel and iron bend,
but break not; and the buckles of red gold may get
wet, but they rust not.
Ilya’ then got upon his good steed, and took with
60


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
him his hero’s weapons. His club of steel took he,
and his grooved spear, his sharp sabre also, and his
whip for the journey. And Ilya set out from the town
of Kiev and rode through the open plain, and up to the
Tartar army. And when he came near and saw that
great host, and heard the shouting of the men and
the neighing of the horses, he began to lose heart.
And when the old Cossack, Ily’ of Mirom rode through
the free and open plain, he could not find out where
the army ended. He leapt up a high hill, looked round
on all sides and looked down upon the Tartar army;
he could see no end or limit to it.
He came down from that high hill and rode on
through the free and open plain, and he leapt up
another high hill and looked towards the western side
and saw some white tents standing, and by the tents
stood heroes’ horses. He hastened down from that
high hill and rode through the freedom of the open
plain, and he came to the white tents. And when
Ilya got down from his good horse near the white tents,
there stood the heroes’ horses. They were standing by a
white linen cloth, and on the cloth millet and spring
corn were scattered.
Ilya let the silken bridle hang loose on _ the
neck of his good hero horse and urged on his horse
to the white linen, saying:
“Pleasant indeed would it be to taste it, if the
heroes’ horses will allow him upon the white linen
cloth to share the millet and spring corn.”
61


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
His good horse stood by the linen cloth and began
to eat the millet and spring corn, and the old Cossack,
Ily&4 of Murom went to the white tent. In the tent
were twelve heroes, and the heroes were all Russian,
and they sat there eating bread and salt, and they
were about to dine.
And Ily4 went into the tent and said:
“A good appetite to you, Heroes‘ of Holy Russia,
and to thee, Samson, my dear godfather!”
“Come here, my dear godson!” said his godfather.
“Come, old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom. Sit down and eat
with us.”
And he stood up on his nimble feet to greet
Ilya of Murom. And they greeted each other and
kissed each other, and he made Ilyd sit at their
table to eat bread and salt with them. Twelve heroes
were they, and Ily&4 was the thirteenth. They all ate
and drank, and when they had dined they came away
from the oaken table and made their prayer to God.
Then the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, spoke and
said :
“My dear godfather, Samson, and you, O mighty
Russian heroes! I pray you saddle your good horses
and ride out through the free and open plain
to glorious, royal Kiev town. For before our town of
Kiev stands that dog, King Kalin with his great army.
He will lay waste royal Kiev town and cut the peasants
to pieces. He will send the churches of God up in
smoke; and as for Prince Vladimir and Apraxia the
Princess, he would cut off their turbulent heads, Now,
62


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
come ye and defend the Faith and country, and defend
our glorious, royal Kiev town, and protect Prince
Vladimir and Apraxia the Princess.”
And Samson, his godfather, answered him:
“Q my beloved godson, old Cossack, [ya of
Mtrom! We will not saddle our horses and ride
through the free and open plain to defend our Faith
and country, and defend royal Kiev town. We will
not defend the churches of God or protect Prince
Vladimir and Apraxia the Princess. For the Prince
in truth has many princes and nobles, and he gives
them food and drink and rewards them. Nothing
have we from Prince Vladimir.”
“OQ Samson, my dear god-father,’ said the old
Cossack, Ily4 of Mutrom, “this would be no good thing
on our part, to stand apart when King Kalin lays
waste Kiev town, and cuts the peasants to pieces, and
sends the churches of God up in smoke, and cuts off
the turbulent heads of Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia. Come, saddle your good horses and
ride through the open plain to Kiey town, to defend
the Faith and country and glorious, royal Kiev, and to
protect the churches of God, and Vladimir the Prince
with the Princess Apraxia.”
But unavailing were Ilyd’s entreaties; not one
hero would join him for the defence of Kiev town
against the Tartar King and his hosts. Nothing
had they from Prince Vladimir, so they would not help
him.
63


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
When Ilya saw that he could not persuade them,
he went out from the white tent to his good hero-
horse, took him by his silken bridle and led him away
from the white linen cloth, and from the millet and
spring corn. And Ilya got upon his good steed and
rode through the free and open plain, and up to the
great Tartar army.
No bright falcon is this attacking geese and swans
and flights of grey ducks, but a Hero of Holy Russia,
advancing to attack that great host of Tartars.
He urged on his heroic steed, and rode on through
the Tartar army. He began to ride over the Tartar
soldiers and to trample them under his horse’s feet, to
tread them under foot and slay them with his spear.
He fought with that great army, and beat down men
as if he were mowing grass.
His good heroic horse spoke to him in human
tongue:
“Come, thou glorious hero of Holy Russia! If thou
dost trample down the Tartars, thou canst not by
thyself conquer this great army. Ride thou up to that
dog, King Kalin, and to that great host of soldiers.
With him are mighty heroes and bold warrior-women
of the plains. That dog, King Kalin has had three
deep trenches made in the glorious open plain. When
thou ridest on the free and open plain, thou wilt beat
down many men of the forces, and when we come to
the deep trenches I shall leap out of the first trench
and will bear thee thence. When we come to the next
64


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
trench, I shall leap out and bear thee thence. But at
the third deep trench I shall leap out, but I shall not
bear thee out of it; in the deep trench wilt thou
remain.”
Now the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, liked not this
thing. In his white hand he took his whip with the
lash of silk, and beat his horse upon the ribs, and thus
he spoke to his steed:
“Q thou faithless dog! I feed and water thee
and provide for thee, and thou wouldst leave me in
the open plain, even in those deep trenches!”
And Ilya rode on through the free and open plain
to that great army. And he trampled men under foot
and speared them with his spear, and beat them down
like mowing grass.
And Ilya’s strength grew no less, and when he
came to the deep trench his good horse leapt out
again and bore Ily4 thence, and he urged on his hero-
horse through the free and open plain to that great
army; and again he trampled the Tartars under foot,
and speared them and beat them down like mowing
grass. And Ilyd’s strength grew no less; he sat his
good horse and grew no older. And he cut his way
through with his hero-horse and fell into the second
trench. His good steed leapt out and bore Ilya thence;
and Ily4 again urged on his steed through the free
and open plain, and again he trampled men under foot
and speared them, and beat down Tartars like mowing
grass. And Ilyd’s strength became no less; he sat his
good steed and grew no older; but he fell into the
65


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
third trench. He cut his way through the deep trench,
and also out of the third trench leapt his good heroic
steed, but Ilya he bore not out thence, for Ilya slipped
off his good horse, and in the deep trench he remained.
And there came the Tartars running to catch the
good horse, but the heroic steed would not allow
himself to be taken, but galloped away through the
open plain.
Then came the pagan Tartars and fell upon the
old Cossack, Ily&4 of Murom, and they chained together
his nimble feet, and bound his white hands, and the
Tartars said:
“Cut off his turbulent head.”
But some of the Tartars said:
“There is no need to cut off his turbulent head;
we will lead Ilya to the dog, King Kalin, and what he
commands that must we do.”
And they took Ilya through the open plain to that
pavilion of white linen, and led him in to the dog,
King Kalin, and placed him before the King, and spoke
thus to King Kalin:
“Now, O King Kalin, we have taken the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom, and have brought him to thee,
O King. Do to him as thou wilt.”
Then the dog, King Kalin spoke to Ilya, and said:
“Now, thou old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom! A young
puppy have they let loose against my great army! How
couldst thou alone overcome my great host? Unchain
Ilya’s nimble feet and unloose his white hands.”
66


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
So the Tartars removed the bonds from his feet
and hands, and the dog, King Kalin said:
“Now old Cossack, Ilya4 of Mtrom! Sit down with
me at my table, and eat of my sugar sweetmeats and
drink of my honey drink. Wear my costly garments,
and take from my chest of gold what thou needest.
Serve no longer the Prince Vladimir, but serve the dog,
King Kalin.”
And Ilya answered the King:
“T will not sit at the same table with thee, nor
eat thy sugar sweetmeats, nor drink of thy honey
drinks. JI will not wear thy costly garments, nor take
gold from thy chest. I will not serve thee, thou dog,
King Kalin, but will serve my Faith and country, and
defend the churches of God and Vladimir the Prince
and the Princess Apraxia.”
Then went forth the old Cossack, Ilya’ of Murom,
from that tent of white linen, into the free and open
plain. And the pagan Tartars began to press upon
him and tried to surround him, hoping to gain
possession of the old Cossack’s gear. Ilya saw that he
must bestir himself, and he seized a Tartar by his feet
and began to swing him round, began to strike the
Tartars with the Tartar, till they began to flee from
him. And the old Cossack went thus through the
whole Tartar army, and came forth into the free and
open plain, and cast the Tartar on one side.
Then Ily& walked on through the open plain, and
67 —


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he had neither horse nor weapons, but he whistled a
mighty whistle, and his good steed heard him on the
open plain, and galloped to the old Cossack his master.
The old Cossack, Ilya got upon his good steed and
rode on through the plain till he came to a high hill,
and he leapt up the hill and looked down towards the
west. And in the west near the white tents stood
the good horses of the heroes. Ilyd4 turned that way
with his good war-horse. He took his strong bow and
bent it with his white hands. He tightened the bow-
string of silk, placed the sharp arrow, and into the
white tent shot he that arrow, saying:
“Fly, O sharp arrow, fly to the white tent. Take
the roof off the white tent, and go, thou arrow, to the
white breast of my godfather. Creep thou into his
breast and make a scratch, only a small scratch, a
small scratch, not a large one. He sleeps there and
takes his ease, and little can I do here alone.”
And he let go the silken bowstring and sent off
that sharp arrow, and that sharp arrow whistled into
that hero’s white tent. It took the roof off the white
tent and fell upon the white breast of Samson. It
crept into his white breast and made but a small
prick, and Samson, the renowned hero of Holy Russia,
woke up from his deep sleep and opened his bright
eyes. Quickly he stood upon his nimble feet and cried :
“Ho! my renowned heroes of Holy Russia! Quickly
saddle your good horses and mount them. From my
beloved godson has flown a sharp arrow through my
glorious white tent. From my tent it took the roof,
68


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and the arrow crept into my white breast, made a
small prick, not a large one. The cross at my neck
preserved me, Samson, the cross at my neck weighing
forty stone. Had that cross not been upon my breast,
my tempestuous head would have been torn off.”
Then all those heroes of Holy Russia quickly
saddled their good horses and rode through the open
plain, towards Kiev town, to the Tartar army.
And from the high hill the old Cossack, Llya of
Mtrom, saw them, as they rode their good horses. He
came down from the high hill and rode to meet the
Russian heroes. Twelve in number were the heroes
and Ilya was the thirteenth.
They rode up to the Tartar host and pushed on
their heroic steeds and began to fight the Tartar
army. And they were trampling on the great army,
and they came to the linen tent.
And in the tent that dog, King Kalin was sitting,
and the heroes said:
“We will cut off the turbulent head of that
dog, King Kalin.”
“Why should we cut off his turbulent head?”
said the old Cossack, Ily4 of Mirom. “We will take
him to royal Kiev town, to the glorious Prince
Vladimir.”
So to the glorious Prince Vladimir at the royal
town of Kiev they took the dog, King Kilin. To the
white stone palace they took him, and Vladimir, Prince
of royal Kiev, took that dog by his white hands and
Mees
( O Gs S.


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
made him sit at the oaken table, gave him sugar
sweetmeats to eat and honey drink to drink.
And to Vladimir the Prince spoke King Kalin
these words:
“Come now, Vladimir, Prince of royal Kiev, do not
cut off my warlike head. We will write between us a
great writing, and I, King Kalin, will pay thee tribute
for ever and ever—I to thee, Prince Vladimir!”
And then in those good old times they all sang
Glory!
And so they had peace for a time, but fresh hordes
of Tartars still came, and the Russian heroes fought
them, and sometimes the Russians could not overcome
the Tartars, and in one of these great fights Ilya, they
say, was caught away from the fighting, and he was
turned into stone, and his good horse with him.
70












Sees
SS
Sa a =
Sat
a,
Se— ee
2
.
-
eos —
i
So, ee 2
See
Se
eee ESAS
ein te
gina
eee,
3
x
=
:
=
eta
se
Ss
Se - —< bn i Pet aa > ae
gat
See
ae,
tp = et
