I don't just know who KINGSLEY was, but he was a good sort, I
          reckon!
  When nerves are slack and spirits low, the glowing pipe-bowl seems
          to beckon
  Like a good ghost or spirit kind to the fireside where age reposes.
  Yes! bacca makes an old man's chair as easeful as a bed of roses.

  Bad habit! So the strict ones say; expensive, wasteful, and
          un-Christian!
  I cannot argue of it out; I'm only a poor old Philistian.
  But oh the comfort of a pipe, the company it lends the lonely!
  It seems the poor soul's faithful friend, and oftentimes the last
          and only.

  Thanks be, they're not the hard sort _here_, in Nazareth House.
          The gentle sisters
  Take on a many helpful task; some of 'em, I misdoubt, are twisters.
  I don't suppose our "shag"-fumes seem as sweet to them as to us
          others;
  But--well, they do not treat us here as badged machines, but human
          brothers.

  Stranded, alone, at seventy-five, after a life of luckless labour,
  One feels what 'tis to be esteemed not as a nuisance, but a
          neighbour;
  A neighbour in the Good Book's sense; a poor one, and a helpless,
          truly,
  But--_not_ a plague, who'll live too long, if he is cossetted
          unduly.

  Lawks me, the difference! Don't you know the chilly scorn, the
          silent snubbing
  Which makes a man, as _is_ a man, feel he'd far rather take a
          drubbing?
  Old age and workhouse-duds may hide a deal of nature--from
          outsiders;
  But do you think old "crocks" can't _feel_, when they're shrunk
          from, like snails
  or spiders?

  After my dinner, with my "clay," stringed round the stem, that
          gums, now toothless,
  May grip it firmer, here I sit and muse; and memory's sometimes
          ruthless
  In bringing up a blundering past. We own up frank, me and my
          fellows,
  Where we've gone wrong, and, in regrets employ our wheezy, worn
          old bellows.

  What might have been, if--if--ah, _if_! That little word, of just
          two letters,
  Stops me worse than a five-barred gate. I wonder if it does my
          betters?
  We never tire round Winter's fire, or settle-ranged in Summer
          weather,
  Of telling of the wandering ways by which we gathered _here_
          together.

  If some who prate of paupers' ways, their tantrums, or their love
          of snuffing,
  Their fretting at cold, hard-fast rules, their fancy for sly
          bacca-puffing,
  Could only scan the paupers' past a little closer than their mode
          is,
  They'd learn that still some sparks of soul burn in those
          broken-down old bodies.

  And soul does kick at iron rules, and icy ways. Old blood runs
          chilly,
  And craves the heat, of love, fire, pipe, to warm it up like. Very
          silly,
  No doubt, from BUMBLE'S point of view! _Here_ we're held human,
          though so humble;
  And, Heaven be blessed!--at Nazareth House we've never known the
          rule of BUMBLE.

  The very old and very young are much alike in many a matter;
  Comfort and cheeriness we want, play or a pipe, romps or a chatter.
  The Nazareth Sisterhood know this, and what is more, they work
          according.
  'Tis love and comfort make a Home, without 'em 'tis bare roof and
          boarding!

  Bitter-sweet memories come sometimes; but a gay burst of
          baby-laughter,--
  For we all _laugh_ at Nazareth House!--will banish gathering
          blues. And after?
  Well, there's the free-permitted whiff, the "old-boy" gossip, low
          but cheery;
  Rest and a Sister's sunny smile soon drive off whim and
          whig-maleery.

  And so laid up, like some old hulk that can no more hope for
          commission,
  I sit, and muse, and puff; and wait that last great change in
          man's condition
  That shifts us to that Great High House to which the Sisters point
          us daily;
  Awaiting which in homely ease, Old Age dwells calmly if not gaily.

       *       *       *       *       *

INTELLIGENCE A L'AMERICAINE.

_Telegram No. 1._--Nothing could have been more terrible than the
scene following upon the earthquake. The houses sank through the
ground, and immediately a number of lions, tigers, and poisonous
serpents, attracted by the unusual occurrence, sprang upon the poor
inhabitants, and by their fierce attacks increased their misfortune.
But this was not all. Men and women, using swords, battle-axes, and
revolvers, fought amongst themselves, until the commotion created by
the landslip assumed the appearance of a pandemonium. At this moment,
to make confusion worse confounded, a heavy storm broke over the
fast-disappearing village, and thunderbolts fell like peas expelled
through a peashooter. As if this were not enough, several prairie
fires crept up, and the flames augmented the general discomfort. Take
it all and all, the sight was enough to make the cheek grow pale with
terror and apprehension.

_Telegram No. 2._--Please omit lions, tigers, poisonous serpents,
swords, battle-axes, revolvers, thunderbolts, prairie fires and cheek.
They were forwarded in Telegram No. 1 owing to a clerical error.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. R. STARTLED.--"Most extraordinary things are reported in the
papers!" observed Mrs. R. "Only the other day I either heard or read
that there was a dangerous glazier somewhere about in the Caucasus,
that he was using horrible language, and threatening to d---- you'll
excuse my using such a word--the Terek (whoever he may be), and that
then he was going to amuse--no, the word was 'divert'--somebody.
Clearly a lunatic. But who can be diverted by such antics? And why
don't they lock up the glazier?" [_On referring to the report, her
nephew read that "A glacier was causing great alarm." &c., &c., that
it was expected temporarily to "dam the Terek, and divert a vast body
of water_," &c.]

       *       *       *       *       *